ralph fiennes is the title character , an amnesiac burn victim whose gradual return to memory , and particularly the memory of love , is the ostensible focus of the film .
juliette binoche's nurse comes as close as this film gets to an emotional heart .
 ) and a " popular , flirt " girl named jennifer ( claire forlani ) .
thematically in cinema , love for family has been used frequently and emphatically to highlight more abstract aspects of characters ; it is rare , however , for it to develop as outstandingly as it does in roberto benigni's neo-classic drama , life is beautiful through a central cast of father , mother , and son , benigni demonstrates the wonderful , undying love that a family shares in the best of times and the worst of times life * is * beautiful for guido orefice ( roberto benigni , directing himself here for the sixth time in his career ) , an italian jew , master con man , and aspiring waiter extraordinaire although prior to this turning point benigni plays guido with a sort of goofy charm , he relaxes the role to ensure his son's happiness benigni's performance is truly a well-rounded one , and certainly one of the more fluid turns all year .
living in 1930's italy , he lives a carefree life of good fortune ; it is made even better when he happens upon a pretty schoolteacher named dora ( nicoletta braschi ) .
although dora is already engaged , guido manages to sweep her off her feet and persuades her to marry him instead ; the two have a child named joshua ( giorgio cantarini ) .
working in the motion picture industry must be a constant source of frustration for a front-line african american actress like jada pinkett smith .
 the film offers a few funny ( albeit juvenile ) moments and the on-screen relationship between pinkett smith's woo and tommy davidson's tim is appealing on those rare occasions when the two aren't forced to play it dumb for the sake of an endless barrage of cheap gags .
guido , dora , and their 5-year-old son , giosue ? ( giorgio cantarini ) are a happy family .
 young einstein sprang from the twisted mind of yahoo serious , who not only wrote , produced , edited , and directed the film , but also starred and did his own stunts  his creation is about as stupid and contrived as you'd expect from someone named yahoo  yahoo plays einstein as a naive and unrefined country hick--a clown with an insatiable curiosity  although yahoo's performance is at first endearing , the one-dimensional characterization loses its novelty faster than you can say e=mc2  yahoo has created a charming family for albert , and the scenes on tasmania are often clever  yahoo must be an mtv addict because his movie features an omnipresent soundtrack ; unfortunately , the music is altogether gratuitous and quickly becomes overbearing  the instrumental score , on the other hand , is generally playful ; yahoo uses such classics as the " 1812 overture " and the theme from the good , the bad and the ugly to great comic effect .
one of the contributors to the destruction of the batman film franchise chris o'donnell stars in this remake of buster keaton's 1925 silent film seven chances  o'donnell plays jimmie shannon , the manager of a pool table manufacturing company  it's just chris o'donnell running from 100 , 000 obnoxious , greedy , angry and stupid women  apparently there was even more footage of the gang of brides chasing o'donnell around the city , and at one point o'donnell is leaping from the tops of buses .
one of the contributors to the destruction of the batman film franchise chris o'donnell stars in this remake of buster keaton's 1925 silent film seven chances  now i've never seen seven chances , as i'm more of a chaplin fan than a keaton fan , but i seriously doubt that the classic version could be as insipid as this .
 now i've never seen seven chances , as i'm more of a chaplin fan than a keaton fan , but i seriously doubt that the classic version could be as insipid as this .
 he also fears commitment , and despite dating anne ( renee zellweger ) for over three years , he's unwilling to marry her  i'd marry renee zellweger in a second ) .
 jimmie's grandfather ( peter ustinov , completely wasted ) dies and leaves jimmie his entire estate of 100 million dollars as well as ownership of the pool table business  ustinov's character left a video will , and while he's reading the ridiculous clause in it , i thought to myself " what is this , brewster's millions ? " .
in " the astronaut's wife , " charlize theron plays a young woman with a nervous demeanor , pixie-hairdo and demon spawn unwittingly growing in her belly .
 ok , maybe " the astronaut's wife " deviates from " rosemary's baby " turf for its set-up , which finds our heroine terrorized not by satan's minions but her possessed husband ( johnny depp ) , a shuttle pilot whose mission mishap leaves him , um , a changed man .
 this bodes horribly for each dramatic development , like the surfacing of a suspicious nasa official ( " speed " 's joe morton ) to instigate jill's slow and stupid comprehension of the truth .
jay and silent bob strike back , kevin smith's swan song to his two most famous characters , is the best received comedy that i've seen since there's something about mary , which is a tea party in comparison to the foul-mouthed humor in jay and silent bob strike back  )in one of the fastest paced movies of the year , the story has jay and silent bob ( jason mewes and kevin smith ) , a pair of card carrying drug dealers , traveling from their new jersey convenience store home to hollywood so that they can stop a movie granted , it's not the movie for everyone , but , if you like kevin smith's brand of humor , you'll find that this is his best .
the story's main subplot concerns four animal rights activists , justice ( shannon elizabeth ) and her three sexy buddies , sissy ( eliza dushku ) , missy ( jennifer schwalbach smith ) and chrissy ( ali larter ) .
the story's main subplot concerns four animal rights activists , justice ( shannon elizabeth ) and her three sexy buddies , sissy ( eliza dushku ) , missy ( jennifer schwalbach smith ) and chrissy ( ali larter ) .
the story's main subplot concerns four animal rights activists , justice ( shannon elizabeth ) and her three sexy buddies , sissy ( eliza dushku ) , missy ( jennifer schwalbach smith ) and chrissy ( ali larter ) .
the story's main subplot concerns four animal rights activists , justice ( shannon elizabeth ) and her three sexy buddies , sissy ( eliza dushku ) , missy ( jennifer schwalbach smith ) and chrissy ( ali larter ) .
in " twilight , " a ex-alcoholic , ex-cop , ex-husband , ex-private-eye , harry ross ( paul newman ) , works for a pair of aging hollywood actors , catherine ( susan sarandon ) and jack ames ( gene hackman )  newman   " twilight " wants to be character-driven like " nobody's fool " ( also directed by benton , also starring newman , based on a novel by russo ) was , but the tired script gives the actors too little to work with .
in " twilight , " a ex-alcoholic , ex-cop , ex-husband , ex-private-eye , harry ross ( paul newman ) , works for a pair of aging hollywood actors , catherine ( susan sarandon ) and jack ames ( gene hackman )  hackman .
in " twilight , " a ex-alcoholic , ex-cop , ex-husband , ex-private-eye , harry ross ( paul newman ) , works for a pair of aging hollywood actors , catherine ( susan sarandon ) and jack ames ( gene hackman )  sarandon .
  " twilight " also squanders a fine supporting cast : stockard channing ( harry's friend on the police force ) , reese witherspoon ( jack & catherine's bratty kid ) , giancarlo esposito ( the humorous sidekick ) , john spencer ( harry's nemesis on the force ) , liev schreiber and margo martindale ( the blackmailers ) , and james garner ( a cop who bailed movie stars out of trouble ) .
  " twilight " also squanders a fine supporting cast : stockard channing ( harry's friend on the police force ) , reese witherspoon ( jack & catherine's bratty kid ) , giancarlo esposito ( the humorous sidekick ) , john spencer ( harry's nemesis on the force ) , liev schreiber and margo martindale ( the blackmailers ) , and james garner ( a cop who bailed movie stars out of trouble ) .
would you believe -- in real life , i mean -- that if you were julia roberts , that you'd be the ugly underdog to your sister , the creepy catherine zeta-jones ? let me tell you what reality is  reality is that you are megastar julia fricking roberts and your brother is eric roberts , and he picks up whatever crumbs of stardom fall off your coattails as you blaze across the sky in a golden chariot  america's sweethearts is the opposite of reality , a train wreck that tries to sell julia as a scruffy also-ran , presumably because she wears horn-rimmed glasses and used to be overweight ( uh-huh )  ) and did i mention gwen's sister kiki ( roberts ) is along for the ride ? and that she and eddie just might fall in love along the way ? oh billy , you're a scamp ! the script you've co-written with peter tolan ( what planet are you from ? and bedazzled -- need i say more ? ) is a roast of hollywood and celebrity , sure , but it's not a funny one  aside from a scant few zingers ( yeah , se ? or winces rules ! ) , america's sweethearts' jokes aren't funny , its pace is choppy , and the whole affair comes off as a vanity project -- not for headlining star julia roberts -- but for billy crystal to deliver a bunch of lame punch lines that he wrote himself  julia overcame a lot of spiteful writing and acting to make my best friend's wedding into a winning film , but not even that 90-tooth smile can save her here .
would you believe -- in real life , i mean -- that if you were julia roberts , that you'd be the ugly underdog to your sister , the creepy catherine zeta-jones ? let me tell you what reality is  the plot follows two married , mega-movie stars , gwen and eddie ( zeta-jones and poor , poor john cusack , whose material gets worse every year ) , on the eve of their new star vehicle's release , a film called time over time .
 the plot follows two married , mega-movie stars , gwen and eddie ( zeta-jones and poor , poor john cusack , whose material gets worse every year ) , on the eve of their new star vehicle's release , a film called time over time .
 veteran pr agent lee ( billy crystal ) is called upon to clean up the mess , throwing a press junket in the nevada desert to woo them with the story of a possible reconciliation between the gwen and eddie , presumably distracting the stupid , stupid film critics into forgetting they haven't seen the movie at all  ) and did i mention gwen's sister kiki ( roberts ) is along for the ride ? and that she and eddie just might fall in love along the way ? oh billy , you're a scamp ! the script you've co-written with peter tolan ( what planet are you from ? and bedazzled -- need i say more ? ) is a roast of hollywood and celebrity , sure , but it's not a funny one  yes , crystal tells us , hollywood is lying to our faces ! if you are surprised by this , you might want to check on your subscription to people magazine  aside from a scant few zingers ( yeah , se ? or winces rules ! ) , america's sweethearts' jokes aren't funny , its pace is choppy , and the whole affair comes off as a vanity project -- not for headlining star julia roberts -- but for billy crystal to deliver a bunch of lame punch lines that he wrote himself  i didn't time it ( the movie's not that bad ) , but it's crystal who really has the most screen time and is the unequivocal focus of the film  bad move , billy -- your jokes suck .
 obviously aware of the ugliness before him , director joe roth turns to goofy supporting characters like hank azaria ( as a lisping spaniard ) , christopher walken ( the insane time over time director ) , and alan arkin ( a new age guru in a fright wig ) to crack wise  none of the stereotypes is successful except for walken ; azaria comes off as a preening queen when he's supposed to be macho .
has it really been two decades since walter matthau coached the bad news bears ? nineteen years and two mighty ducks later , the formula is still going strong  writer/director carl franklin ( one false move ) is the force behind this accomplished-but-stiff adaptation of walter mosley's crime novel .
 police academy graduate steve guttenberg stars as a small-town deputy sheriff corralled into co-coaching the school's hastily formed soccer team .
 his partner-in-crime is the new british " exchange teacher " ( olivia d'abo ) , a lively lass who has obviously seen dangerous minds and knows that the best way to gain the respect of a disinterested , outer-city audience is to teach them something neat .
 an awfully big adventure ======================== the reteaming of director mike newell and star hugh grant is about as far removed as you can get from the lightsome comedy of four weddings and a funeral  hugh plays the gay director , an * extremely * unappealing character who may alienate whatever fans are left after the nonsense of nine months  they're fighting over their adoptive mother's estate , a 40 , 000-acre ranch worth millions and supporting dozens of migrant farm workers .
 their second collaboration is a downbeat theatrical drama about a young intern ( georgina cates ) struggling to survive in post-w .
 there are hints that this is taking its toll on his lovely wife , played by catherine keener , who is frustrated by her husband spending all of his time in cleveland rather than in their ugly split-level home in harrisburg , pa .
 later it's the turn of joaquin phoenix ( who's quite good and by far the film's most interesting character as adult bookstore flunky max california ) to cover his face as the horrid thing is screened over and over again .
synopsis : sonny koufax ( adam sandler ) is a rich , childish , angry man who has just been dumped by his girlfriend vanessa ( kristy swanson )  to many american mothers there's probably nothing more pathetic and unsettling than the sight of a theater full of unsupervised little eight year olds laughing raucously as movie character father adam sandler jokes about a woman's " ice cold tits .
synopsis : sonny koufax ( adam sandler ) is a rich , childish , angry man who has just been dumped by his girlfriend vanessa ( kristy swanson ) .
 in a bid to impress vanessa sonny impersonates his friend kevin ( jon stewart ) and adopts a 5 year old boy named julian ( cole and dylan sprouse ) while kevin is on an overseas trip .
 in a bid to impress vanessa sonny impersonates his friend kevin ( jon stewart ) and adopts a 5 year old boy named julian ( cole and dylan sprouse ) while kevin is on an overseas trip .
 in a bid to impress vanessa sonny impersonates his friend kevin ( jon stewart ) and adopts a 5 year old boy named julian ( cole and dylan sprouse ) while kevin is on an overseas trip .
 philip henslowe ( geoffrey rush ) owns 1 of the 2 theatres in london  geoffrey rush is nothing short of incredible and judi dench is breathtaking .
 it is at the peak of the royal theatre era , and queen elizabeth ( the recently damed judi dench , by , appropriately enough , queen elizabeth ii ) is very much a fan  geoffrey rush is nothing short of incredible and judi dench is breathtaking .
 henslowe employs the young playwright , william shakespeare ( joseph fiennes ) to pen a comedic production  joseph fiennes may just be the worst of fall though .
 then , as only hollywood could have it , through a long set of twisted events , he meets viola de lesseps ( gwyneth paltrow ) and falls madly in love , thus curing his writer's block  gwyneth paltrow is little more than satisfactory in her lead position as well .
 you will also find a very good performance by ben affleck in his first real role since good will hunting ( no , armageddon doesn't qualify as real acting .
the caveman's valentine starring samuel l  jackson , ann magnuson , aunjanue ellis , tamara tunie screenplay by george dawes green , based on his novel directed by kasi lemmons * * * for more film , dvd and books about movie reviews , plus annual coverage of the toronto international film festival , visit _film freak central_ - http : //filmfreakcentral believing at first that his imagined nemesis stuyvesant , shooting evil rays into his mind from atop the chrysler building , is responsible for the murder , romulus ( samuel l  jackson ) is put on the trail of an avant-garde photographer in the mapplethorpe mould , david leppenraub ( colm feore ) .
 jackson , ann magnuson , aunjanue ellis , tamara tunie screenplay by george dawes green , based on his novel directed by kasi lemmons * * * for more film , dvd and books about movie reviews , plus annual coverage of the toronto international film festival , visit _film freak central_ - http : //filmfreakcentral .
 jackson , ann magnuson , aunjanue ellis , tamara tunie screenplay by george dawes green , based on his novel directed by kasi lemmons * * * for more film , dvd and books about movie reviews , plus annual coverage of the toronto international film festival , visit _film freak central_ - http : //filmfreakcentral his minor sleuthing interrupted by the occasional delusional fit and bouts with an ecstasy of creation ( romulus was a brilliant julliard-trained pianist prior to his psychosis ) , romulus uncovers clues and harasses suspects on his way to convincing his police-woman daughter ( aunjanue ellis ) that even though he's a nut , that doesn't mean that he can't solve a high-profile society murder .
 jackson , ann magnuson , aunjanue ellis , tamara tunie screenplay by george dawes green , based on his novel directed by kasi lemmons * * * for more film , dvd and books about movie reviews , plus annual coverage of the toronto international film festival , visit _film freak central_ - http : //filmfreakcentral his minor sleuthing interrupted by the occasional delusional fit and bouts with an ecstasy of creation ( romulus was a brilliant julliard-trained pianist prior to his psychosis ) , romulus uncovers clues and harasses suspects on his way to convincing his police-woman daughter ( aunjanue ellis ) that even though he's a nut , that doesn't mean that he can't solve a high-profile society murder .
 jackson , ann magnuson , aunjanue ellis , tamara tunie screenplay by george dawes green , based on his novel directed by kasi lemmons * * * for more film , dvd and books about movie reviews , plus annual coverage of the toronto international film festival , visit _film freak central_ - http : //filmfreakcentral with a long-vanished wife ( tamara tunie ) acting as a spiritual guide , the occasional social caste commentary , the secret base in a cave , a divergent genius personality with a network of informants and supporters , and a wickedly colourful arch-enemy , the film piles on the lurid comic book details and dizzying slapdash colours to such a lavish extent that i was vaguely surprised that the blue police cars weren't inscribed with " gotham pd .
the first film produced by adam sandler's happy madison production company ( clever title eh ? ) is essentially a one joke movie , much like the movies sandler stars in himself .
 rob schneider stars as the title character , a scruffy fish tank cleaner who ends up becoming a " man-whore " to raise enough money to replace a wealthy client's custom made fish tank , which deuce destroyed while staying in his home .
 only a quick cameo from norm macdonald ( and a follow up joke during the closing credits ) generates any chuckles .
in this theatrical remake of the television series the saint , and its series sequel the return of the saint , val kilmer plays simon templar , an elusive thief who makes a living by stealing things from others for others kilmer actually provides a rather good role in this movie , although at times you are left to ponder how he actually gets out of the many tight situations as a young boy , kilmer's character enjoyed magic and would often journey away from his schoolwork kilmer's first mission that we are shown is to steal a microchip from ivan tretiak , played by rade serbedzija this presents the option for kilmer to achieve his goal one of the enjoyable features in the film is the disguises that kilmer dawns to complete his missions kilmer utilizes one such disguise to lure shue's character into getting to know him even more , which would provide him a means of stealing the energy formula when the two meet , and end up having a sensual experience , kilmer's character is seemingly falling in love with emma russell , as she is falling in love with kilmer's alter-ego , a traveling artist these moments are almost always thanks to kilmer's extraneous , very convincing disguises and personalities .
kilmer's first mission that we are shown is to steal a microchip from ivan tretiak , played by rade serbedzija .
 emma russell , portrayed by elisabeth shue , has discovered a way to produce energy by way of cold fusion tretiak hires him to steal the equations , small pieces of paper , from shue kilmer utilizes one such disguise to lure shue's character into getting to know him even more , which would provide him a means of stealing the energy formula shue's character is eventually able to track down simon templar by putting the pieces ( the names of the catholic saints ) together , something no one else is able to do .
like its predecessor , scream 2 opens with a splashy , eye-grabbing prologue which only vaguely ties into the film's principal narrative ; this time around , we're following the exploits of a young couple ( jada pinkett and omar epps ) attending a riotously gleeful sneak preview screening of stab ( a running film-within-a-film gag where the " true life " events behind the first film has been turned into a movie ) .
like its predecessor , scream 2 opens with a splashy , eye-grabbing prologue which only vaguely ties into the film's principal narrative ; this time around , we're following the exploits of a young couple ( jada pinkett and omar epps ) attending a riotously gleeful sneak preview screening of stab ( a running film-within-a-film gag where the " true life " events behind the first film has been turned into a movie ) .
however , although it tries hard and has some good ideas -- the nightmarishly enthusiastic audience in the film vaguely reminded me of the one i was sharing the theatre with , and i was certainly thinking about gutting the overly-noisy person a few seats away myself after about fifteen minutes -- the prologue is a pale imitation of the bravura opening sequence in the original with drew barrymore ( where her performance not only convinced me that she * could * act , but was so good that it would rank among the best performances in a horror film that i've ever seen ) .
flash to the campus of a smalltown ohio college , where returning characters sidney ( neve campbell ) and randy ( jamie kennedy ) have relocated for their studies and to escape the notoriety from the events in the first film .
flash to the campus of a smalltown ohio college , where returning characters sidney ( neve campbell ) and randy ( jamie kennedy ) have relocated for their studies and to escape the notoriety from the events in the first film .
 hugh grant , a huge dork  it's not the whole oral-sex/prostitution thing ( referring to grant , not me ) that bugs me , it's the fact that grant is annoying  since when do eye flutters and nervous smiles pass for acting ? but , on the other hand , since when do really bad slapstick ( a fistfight in the delivery room culminating in grant's head in joan cusack's lap--a scene he paid $60 to have included in the movie ) and obscene double entendres ( robin williams , the obstetrician , tells grant's pregnant girlfriend she has " a big pussy , " referring of course to the size of the cat hairs on her coat , but nonetheless , grant paid $60 to have the exchange included in the movie ) pass for comedy ? nine months is a predictable cookie-cutter movie with no originality in humor or plot  hugh grant plays a successful child psychiatrist  grant ( flutters eyelashes , offers a nervous smile , then responds in his annoying english accent and i-think-i-actually-have- talent attitude ) : could you possibly elaborate on that ? kid : my dad's a _huge_ asshole  more like a hugh asshole , but that's beside the point , which is : nine months includes too many needlessly stupid jokes that get laughs from the ten year olds in the audience while everyone else shakes his or her head in disbelief  so , anyway , grant finds out his girlfriend is pregnant and does his usual reaction ( fluttered eyelashes , nervous smiles )  this paves the way for every possible pregnancy/child birth gag in the book , especially since grant's equally annoying friend's wife is also pregnant  hugh grant's sunset boulevard arrest ( please , no caught-with-his-pants-down jokes ) may bring more people into the theaters , but they certainly won't leave with a smile on their faces , not after 90 minutes of grant's nervous smiles  over 80 ( sorry , hugh ) will know they wasted their money on an unfulfilled desire .
 since when do eye flutters and nervous smiles pass for acting ? but , on the other hand , since when do really bad slapstick ( a fistfight in the delivery room culminating in grant's head in joan cusack's lap--a scene he paid $60 to have included in the movie ) and obscene double entendres ( robin williams , the obstetrician , tells grant's pregnant girlfriend she has " a big pussy , " referring of course to the size of the cat hairs on her coat , but nonetheless , grant paid $60 to have the exchange included in the movie ) pass for comedy ? nine months is a predictable cookie-cutter movie with no originality in humor or plot .
 since when do eye flutters and nervous smiles pass for acting ? but , on the other hand , since when do really bad slapstick ( a fistfight in the delivery room culminating in grant's head in joan cusack's lap--a scene he paid $60 to have included in the movie ) and obscene double entendres ( robin williams , the obstetrician , tells grant's pregnant girlfriend she has " a big pussy , " referring of course to the size of the cat hairs on her coat , but nonetheless , grant paid $60 to have the exchange included in the movie ) pass for comedy ? nine months is a predictable cookie-cutter movie with no originality in humor or plot  not even robin williams , who plays a russian doctor who has recently decided to switch from veterinary medicine to obstetrics , has much humor .
 the annoying friend is played by tom arnold , who provides most of the cacophonous slapstick , none of which is funny , such as a scene where arnold beats up a costumed " arnie the dinosaur " ( you draw your own parallels on that one ) in a toy store .
 the only interesting character in the movie is played by jeff goldblum , who should have hid himself away somewhere after the dreadful hideaway , as an artist with a fear of ( and simultaneous longing for ) commitment .
sigourney weaver is possibly the only actress who could play this character and make her realistic enough for us to care about placing a woman in these situations would sometimes seem unusual , but because of weaver's presence , a woman is the only suitable hero lieutenant ellen ripley ( weaver ) is discovered in hypersleep on the nostromo and is awakened sigourney weaver received an oscar nomination for her portrayal of ripley , incorporating the right amount of sympathy into her hard-edged persona weaver soars above the rest in this film , but she is supposed to .
this team includes a buff private vasquez ( jenette goldstein ) , a questionable corporal hicks ( michael biehn ) , and a loyal android bishop ( lance henriksen ) jenette goldstein shows a fair amount of enthusiasm with her role , and steals several scenes of her own ( though her personality becomes slightly annoying when she isn't fighting ) .
this team includes a buff private vasquez ( jenette goldstein ) , a questionable corporal hicks ( michael biehn ) , and a loyal android bishop ( lance henriksen ) michael biehn gives a very nice performance in the most obligatory role of the film however , biehn does a good job , making it seem original again .
this team includes a buff private vasquez ( jenette goldstein ) , a questionable corporal hicks ( michael biehn ) , and a loyal android bishop ( lance henriksen ) lance henriksen is terrific as bishop , showing that androids don't always have to be flat characters .
the only survivor is 12 year old rebecca " newt " jorden ( carrie henn ) carrie henn gives an above average performance for a child , developing a three-dimensional character from her quiet attitude .
 the main one is jill young ( poor charlize theron , forced to waste her talent ) , a lover of gorillas .
 soon , zoologist gregg o'hara ( bill paxton ) discovers joe ; he quickly realizes that poachers want to get joe and sell him to a big game hunter named strasser ( rade sherbedgia ) , who just happens to be the same guy who killed jill's mother .
 the introduction of the wise-guy angle and the loyality among buddies bit , are not moving enough emotional experiences or intelligent enough dramatics to elevate this film above its limited story line despite the tour-de-force performance by the star of the film , adrien brody as ray  there was just no energy or spark or anything relevant in this superficial film to keep it interesting , though adrien brody showed signs that he could be a future star .
 ( vincent ) is now trying to make a go of it by running a small scale home-repair business .
 his son lives with him and works unhappily as a shoe salesman , dreaming of getting rich quickly so he can open a business and marry his long-time waitress girlfriend joanne ( sybil ) .
 so when his best friend mike ( gallagher ) , the narrator of the film , gets a chance to sleep with his girlfriend--who cares ? the director must be kidding himself if he thinks we do .
 his buddies , the college student mike and the dependable butchie ( gillan ) , and his old man , who he has this love/hate relationship with , rally to his aid .
close your eyes for a moment , if you will , and imagine the sound of stephen rea's gaelic brogue , silky smooth and irish like a pint of guinness neil jordan's latest film " stars " rea in more ways than one rea , the accomplished irish actor most notable from his star turn in jordan's " the crying game , " contributes a restrained and managed performance as da brady , a small town drunk in an unnamed irish community in the 1960s but it's his wall-to-wall narration as the butcher boy of the title , da brady's son , francis , that makes rea's " performance " worth watching , worth listening to for as much as rea's voiceover permeates almost every scene of " the butcher boy , " owens commands virtually every frame now , she poses as much a threat to the safety and security of town bully francie and his best pal joe ( alan boyle ) as the looming commie menace ( " the butcher boy " is set at a time when the fear of nuclear obliteration is first and foremost in the minds of many )  " pigs ! " screams mrs director jordan's vivid treatment of pat mccabe's nightmare novel produces a sometimes disturbing , dark comedy littered with surreal touches ( such as sin ? ad o'connor playing the virgin mary ) it's not as outlandish as the trailers make out ; instead , this remarkable film focuses on the effects external influences have on the friendship between two boys ( schoolboy chums in real life ) , allowing us to empathize with their plight in the presence of extraordinary behavior rea talks us through it , beautifully , and owens drags us though it , admirably , and , in tandem with jordan's sure hand , theirs are contributions to make " the butcher boy " a film worth savoring .
playing the young francie brady is newcomer eamonn owens and he is , without a doubt , a revelation for as much as rea's voiceover permeates almost every scene of " the butcher boy , " owens commands virtually every frame rea talks us through it , beautifully , and owens drags us though it , admirably , and , in tandem with jordan's sure hand , theirs are contributions to make " the butcher boy " a film worth savoring .
 nugent ( fiona shaw ) .
now , she poses as much a threat to the safety and security of town bully francie and his best pal joe ( alan boyle ) as the looming commie menace ( " the butcher boy " is set at a time when the fear of nuclear obliteration is first and foremost in the minds of many ) .
this film was produced just before the distracting concept of using celebrity voices became in vogue , which started to a certain degree with beauty and the beast and was irrevocably exacerbated by robin williams' much-heralded turn in aladdin ; by the release of the lion king and henceforth , the majority of characters in the animated films were voiced by celebrities .
while it's understandable that animated features lacking the name-recognition or drawing power of disney ( say , balto's use of kevin bacon and bridget fonda , or even anastasia's showcasing of meg ryan and john cusack ) would be forced to turn to this strategy in order to hype their products , it's unfortunate that even disney has embraced this policy .
while it's understandable that animated features lacking the name-recognition or drawing power of disney ( say , balto's use of kevin bacon and bridget fonda , or even anastasia's showcasing of meg ryan and john cusack ) would be forced to turn to this strategy in order to hype their products , it's unfortunate that even disney has embraced this policy .
while it's understandable that animated features lacking the name-recognition or drawing power of disney ( say , balto's use of kevin bacon and bridget fonda , or even anastasia's showcasing of meg ryan and john cusack ) would be forced to turn to this strategy in order to hype their products , it's unfortunate that even disney has embraced this policy .
while it's understandable that animated features lacking the name-recognition or drawing power of disney ( say , balto's use of kevin bacon and bridget fonda , or even anastasia's showcasing of meg ryan and john cusack ) would be forced to turn to this strategy in order to hype their products , it's unfortunate that even disney has embraced this policy .
 hammerbottom ( carol burnett ) to allow louie to attend class .
 dazed , a beautiful brunette ( laura elena harring ) emerges and stumbles down a hill , slipping unobserved into a '30s-style apartment as the tenant leaves for a trip .
 the next morning , a dewy blonde ( naomi watts ) from deep river , ontario , arrives in la with dreams of stardom in her suitcase  elena harring and particularly naomi watts are gifted actresses , effectively making the subtle switch .
 meanwhile , a hotshot director ( justin theroux ) , whose wife is in bed with the poolman , is forced to cast a certain actress in his new film and there's an assassin ( mark pellegrino ) roaming the city .
 meanwhile , a hotshot director ( justin theroux ) , whose wife is in bed with the poolman , is forced to cast a certain actress in his new film and there's an assassin ( mark pellegrino ) roaming the city .
 dancer ann miller who's stiff and self-conscious , speaking - like most lynch players - in staccato tones .
mel , played by mark wahlberg in a dopey , milquetoast role , is a killing machine ; he flips , spins , even breakdances whilst popping caps .
 bruce willis stars as harry stamper , a famed oil-driller commissioned by the white house and nasa to stop a giant asteroid before it travels beyond " zero barrier " and destroys our planet  willis has barely a chance to come alive ; ditto for affleck  so why did they bring him up there to begin with ? rather , why write him into the film ? -give his almost-witty one-liners to serious willis , who scowls and mopes and demonstrates psychotic tendencies : at one point he chases after affleck with his shotgun for screwing his daughter , firing often and causing significant damage to his oil rig .
 we trust nasa to build space shuttles ? ) harry assembles the obligatory " ragtag " bunch of " cowboys " , including a blond guy , a fat guy , a black guy , a wiseass , and the man who is sleeping with his daughter ( affleck )  willis has barely a chance to come alive ; ditto for affleck  so why did they bring him up there to begin with ? rather , why write him into the film ? -give his almost-witty one-liners to serious willis , who scowls and mopes and demonstrates psychotic tendencies : at one point he chases after affleck with his shotgun for screwing his daughter , firing often and causing significant damage to his oil rig  bollocks ! the lovers in the film are miles apart throughout-erase all thoughts of nude sketching or car-sex and replace them with obligatory shots of liv tyler tearing up while ben affleck dicks around in a moon-crawler .
 willis has barely a chance to come alive ; ditto for affleck  liv tyler is pretty and humourless , as always ; suspiciously , four of her father's band's ( " aerosmith " ) songs grace the soundtrack  ) whenever someone dies in this movie , a crew member inevitably yells out " we lost ( insert dead person's last name here ) ! " i must admit that not once could i distinguish a dead oil-guy-cum-astronaut from a live one , and close-ups of the corpses' faces beneath cracked helmets provided little assistance , as their skin was often covered in fake blood  bollocks ! the lovers in the film are miles apart throughout-erase all thoughts of nude sketching or car-sex and replace them with obligatory shots of liv tyler tearing up while ben affleck dicks around in a moon-crawler .
 steve buscemi's character-the wiseass-is exceptionally problematic .
 " original ? ! let me give you a run-through of picture perfect : character a ) kate ( jennifer aniston , from tv's friends ) , a smart , beautiful , professional woman wants two things she can't have : a new job-title and the love of her co-worker kevin bacon  picture perfect also makes the mistake of being _wayyyyy_ too long at 100 minutes , and expecting us to like aniston's character , who comes off as a cold , spoiled bitch .
 " original ? ! let me give you a run-through of picture perfect : character a ) kate ( jennifer aniston , from tv's friends ) , a smart , beautiful , professional woman wants two things she can't have : a new job-title and the love of her co-worker kevin bacon  her boss will only give her the job if she gets married and gets a mortgage and gets a lease on a german sportscar , and kevin bacon pnly sleeps with married or involved girls .
 jordan " ) , " down to earth " tells the tale of lance barton ( chris rock , " lethal weapon iv " ) , a young black standup comic trying to win over the audience at harlem's apollo theater  the original elaine may/warren beatty script has been reworked by chris rock , lance crouther , ali leroi , and louis c  to turn beatty's vehicle as a football player into rock's vehicle as a comic and add some racial humor  as directed by chris weitz and paul weitz ( codirectors of " american pie " and costars of " chuck & buck " ) , the whole affair comes off as amateur hour  most serious of all is the use of rock when his wellington counterpart would have been more appropriate  rock does get the chance to do some fun schtick , such as his turnaround on wellington's plans for a poor neighborhood hospital ( 'bullet in the head ? you got a bed ! ' ) , but he's uneven when interacting with the rest of the cast  stealing the show in every scene she's in is wanda sykes ( " the chris rock show " ) as wellington's disgruntled maid   " down to earth " is for chris rock fans only .
 when he's taken to heaven prematurely by bumbling angel keyes ( eugene levy , " best in show " ) , his only recourse is to return in another body  chaz palminteri and levy are pretty much wasted as heaven's ambassadors .
 of course , wellington is not only rich , but white and 53 years old , which makes lance's bid for closing night at the apollo , as well as his desire to woo suntee ( regina taylor , " jerry maguire " ) , a tad tricky  regina taylor fares well amidst the mediocrity as the young activist who confusedly ends up falling for the man she believed to be her nemesis .
 also good is frankie faison ( " hannibal " ) as whitney , lance's compassionate manager - the only human who's made privy to lance's body body switch .
english professor grady tripp ( michael douglas ) is a master douglas triumphs , playing against type as he spends most of his time disheveled , unshaven and clad in a pink women's house robe  ( michael redman has written this column for so long that he's made mid-life crisis a career choice .
by the evening , our besieged writer is driving though the snow-covered streets of pittsburgh with a suicidal student beside him , a stolen jacket that marilyn monroe wore on her wedding day in the back seat and a murdered blind dog stuffed in the trunk .
he doesn't have much of a life and neither does his star pupil james leer ( tobey maguire ) .
robert downey jr .
frances mcdormand does a good job of her limited role of sara , grady's married lover but we never understand much of who she is .
 bette midler and dennis farina play lilly and dan , actress and author , once married , now violently divorced , and back together one last time for their daughter molly's ( paula marshall ) wedding .
 molly , married now only 24 hours , runs off in search of her irresponsible parents while her husband keith ( jamie denton ) tries to console the abandoned spouses .
 in molly's search for her parents , she somehow falls in love with lilly's paparazzo joey ( danny nucci ) .
 meanwhile , the newlywed keith ends up consoling dan's wife rowena ( gail o'grady ) in bed .
firefighter frank sullivan ( dennis quaid ) puts his life on the line every time he suits up for his job , then goes home to his loving wife julia ( elizabeth mitchell ) and son johnny ( daniel henson ) .
firefighter frank sullivan ( dennis quaid ) puts his life on the line every time he suits up for his job , then goes home to his loving wife julia ( elizabeth mitchell ) and son johnny ( daniel henson ) elizabeth mitchell gets stuck with two thankless roles , playing julia the doting wife * and * mother , but still performs admirably .
firefighter frank sullivan ( dennis quaid ) puts his life on the line every time he suits up for his job , then goes home to his loving wife julia ( elizabeth mitchell ) and son johnny ( daniel henson ) .
the double-pronged story flashes forward to 1999 , where johnny ( now jim caviezel ) is all grown up and working as a police detective .
andre braugher , late of the television show " homicide : life on the street , " gives a nice supporting turn as frank's best friend and future colleague of john .
susan granger's review of " america's sweethearts " ( columbia/sony ) what a waste of a talented cast ! billy crystal and co-writer peter tolan have concocted a sly , provocative premise and , as the opening credits roll , it's obvious that they're attempting an old-fashioned romantic comedy  the story involves a veteran publicist ( billy crystal ) who is summoned to orchestrate a press junket in las vegas when an arrogant director ( christopher walken ) holds a megabuck movie hostage in his editing room , refusing to show it to anyone   ( and crystal thought of this long before a sony exec concocted the phony critic/david manning quote scandal ! ) for help , he turns to gwen's personal assistant/sister ( julia roberts )  crystal's glib , cynical flack isn't wickedly funny enough with a few amusing one-liners .
 the story involves a veteran publicist ( billy crystal ) who is summoned to orchestrate a press junket in las vegas when an arrogant director ( christopher walken ) holds a megabuck movie hostage in his editing room , refusing to show it to anyone .
 he figures that by giving the journalists juicy hints of a possible reconciliation between the film's once-married-but-now-estranged stars , gwen and eddie ( catherine zeta-jones , john cusack ) , they'll be so distracted that they won't remember they didn't see the movie or it wasn't what they expected  zeta-jones's vain , narcissistic diva is undeveloped and one-dimensional  only hank azaria , as zeta-jones's much-macho spanish lover , and stanley tucci , as a studio exec , and roberts manage to whip up any farcical froth .
 he figures that by giving the journalists juicy hints of a possible reconciliation between the film's once-married-but-now-estranged stars , gwen and eddie ( catherine zeta-jones , john cusack ) , they'll be so distracted that they won't remember they didn't see the movie or it wasn't what they expected  after six months under the care of a depak chopra-like guru ( alan arkin ) , cusack's character's too emotionally fragile , lacking the necessary charisma .
 after six months under the care of a depak chopra-like guru ( alan arkin ) , cusack's character's too emotionally fragile , lacking the necessary charisma .
professors anna vrooshka ( elke sommer ) and roland crump ( kenneth williams ) and a group of archaeology students stay in the caravan site owned by major leep ( kenneth connor ) so that they can explore the nearby roman settlement remains .
professors anna vrooshka ( elke sommer ) and roland crump ( kenneth williams ) and a group of archaeology students stay in the caravan site owned by major leep ( kenneth connor ) so that they can explore the nearby roman settlement remains .
professors anna vrooshka ( elke sommer ) and roland crump ( kenneth williams ) and a group of archaeology students stay in the caravan site owned by major leep ( kenneth connor ) so that they can explore the nearby roman settlement remains on the other hand , there are low-key performances from kenneth connor and peter butterworth as barnes the handyman , and there are very poor performances by windsor davies and jack douglas who spend far too much time on the screen !even though there is no real plot to speak of and the jokes are getting bluer due to the new scriptwriter dave freeman , there are enough truly comical moments and bright and breezy performances to lift this carry on above many of its predecessors .
anna has a little trouble understanding english and sometimes people get the wrong end of the stick : - for instance , when anna is asking for 'scrubbers for dirty caravan' , she means that she wants a scrubbing brush to clean the caravan !arthur upmore ( bernard bresslaw ) and his wife linda ( patsy rowlands ) take her mother daphne barnes ( joan sims ) and her minah bird on holiday with them joan sims stands out as the demanding mother-in-law , bernard bresslaw and patsy rowlands work well together as husband and wife , and carol hawkins and sherrie hewson are a welcome addition to the cast .
anna has a little trouble understanding english and sometimes people get the wrong end of the stick : - for instance , when anna is asking for 'scrubbers for dirty caravan' , she means that she wants a scrubbing brush to clean the caravan !arthur upmore ( bernard bresslaw ) and his wife linda ( patsy rowlands ) take her mother daphne barnes ( joan sims ) and her minah bird on holiday with them joan sims stands out as the demanding mother-in-law , bernard bresslaw and patsy rowlands work well together as husband and wife , and carol hawkins and sherrie hewson are a welcome addition to the cast .
so , how does the story go ?as opposed to what some fanatical internet sites would have you believe , sidney prescott ( neve campbell ) , now all-grown-up and constantly dealing with her pass in the constantly tormented sector of her psyche , is not living in hollywood fulfilling her dream to become an actress , but rather in upstate california , living , understandably , alone in the confines of fences and vast security systems .
not only does he sound unmistakably like talented voice-over artist roger jackson ( ha , ha ) , he can now easily duplicate the voices of the lead characters , including sidney , and the returned gale weathers ( courtney cox arquette ) and dewey riley ( david arquette ) .
not only does he sound unmistakably like talented voice-over artist roger jackson ( ha , ha ) , he can now easily duplicate the voices of the lead characters , including sidney , and the returned gale weathers ( courtney cox arquette ) and dewey riley ( david arquette ) .
an enraged shrek storms to the castle , only to find farquaad ( john lithgow ) ready to bargain .
the mirror unveils three choices in a presentation straight out of " the dating game " ( when snow white is shown , the cheeky announcer purrs , " even though she lives with seven men , she's not easy ! " )farquaad selects the lovely princess fiona ( cameron diaz ) and offers shrek a deal : if the ogre snatches fiona from the dragon-protected , lava moat-filled castle in which she is held captive and brings her to the throne , the lord will allow the fairy tale pests to move back on his grounds .
shrek reluctantly agrees and sets off on his quest , accompanied by a motor-mouthed donkey ( eddie murphy ) determined to make the green grump his best friend the computer animation is mostly impressive ( although several key characters look like animated rubber squeeze toys and the human movements are often jerky ) , the voice work is strong ( particularly from eddie murphy ) , the laughs come fast and furious , and the moral , tainted though it may be , is a good one .
but the even greater draw in this film is the standout performance given here by mark wahlberg .
i was also impressed by some of the " real " musicians who played in the film ( zakk wylde from ozzy osbourne , jeff pilson from dokken , stephan jenkins from third eye blind , blas elias from slaughter ) , but actor dominic west as kirk cuddy made the biggest impression among the band members .
 denis leary plays the stereotypical strategist with no ethics who decides the only way for the scandal- plagued senator to win is to play up his irish roots and cash in on that boston roman catholic democrat contingent that's made the kennedy family so popular  so leary orders garofalo to go to ireland and dig up some relatives to exploit  i was excited to see garofalo and leary in the same movie , but they actually only have two or three scenes together  leary stays stateside , for the most part , yelling at garofalo over the phone and generally being an asshole .
 two of the actresses from sorority house massacre 2 are in this film , robyn harris and melissa moore , but they play different characters here .
 two of the actresses from sorority house massacre 2 are in this film , robyn harris and melissa moore , but they play different characters here .
 " there will be another , " the ads for this sequel proclaimed , and why not ? true , brandon lee is dead , but there would be no reason for him to appear in a followup to 1994's the crow , anyway .
 stubbornly , the crow : city of angels backtracks to the beginning of the previous film , when lee's eric draven found himself drawn back out of his grave to do a charles bronson on the thugs who tortured him and his girlfriend to death .
 he's befriended by sarah ( mia kirshner ) , presumably an older version of the child who narrated the first film  kirshner , so beguiling in exotica , is here an exquisitely photographed blank .
 the gang of punks who killed ashe are ostensibly commanded by judah ( richard brooks ) , but a far more interesting choice as leader would have been iggy pop , who plays a gaunt fellow named curve .
 the idea of spinning artist james o'barr's original comic book series into a sequel franchise revolves around the notion that a different startled soul would come back from the dead in each movie , taking its own righteous vengeance against the world .
 of course , you can't really blame the brass for the inclusion of jerry o'connell in this fine crew of thespians .
 gary sinise does another great job , as does cheadle , the film doesn't completely bore you as much as it just moves along slowly without anything really interesting happening , and yes , the " sand-twister " effect that you see in the commercial is well done .
this hip , live action/animation story begins as a monkey snatches a hard-boiled egg from frank , a zookeeper ( bill murray ) , who grabs it back , drops it , then gobbles up the contaminated morsel , explaining , " if it hits and ground and you pick it up within 10 seconds , you can eat it .
 "like " fantastic voyage " ( 1966 ) , the pseudo-science animation then takes over when his body's immune system contacts traffic control as an ingested virus hits the digestive system : " be on the alert for illegal organisms ! "eager to right " a stomach evacuation mistake " he once made , a cocky , clever , courageous white blood cell ( chris rock ) declares , " this is a crime scene ! "and teams up with a conscientious " phi beta capsule " 12-hour cold remedy called drixenol ( david hyde pierce ) to chase down and destroy the deadly " red death " virus ( laurence fishburne ) that's determined to take frank down in 48 hours , beating ebola and e watch out for mucus mudslides , chaos in cerebellum hall and the detritus from booger dam ( runny nose ) , along with comic turns from molly shannon and chris elliot , plus the voices of william shatner and brandy norwood .
 "like " fantastic voyage " ( 1966 ) , the pseudo-science animation then takes over when his body's immune system contacts traffic control as an ingested virus hits the digestive system : " be on the alert for illegal organisms ! "eager to right " a stomach evacuation mistake " he once made , a cocky , clever , courageous white blood cell ( chris rock ) declares , " this is a crime scene ! "and teams up with a conscientious " phi beta capsule " 12-hour cold remedy called drixenol ( david hyde pierce ) to chase down and destroy the deadly " red death " virus ( laurence fishburne ) that's determined to take frank down in 48 hours , beating ebola and e .
 "like " fantastic voyage " ( 1966 ) , the pseudo-science animation then takes over when his body's immune system contacts traffic control as an ingested virus hits the digestive system : " be on the alert for illegal organisms ! "eager to right " a stomach evacuation mistake " he once made , a cocky , clever , courageous white blood cell ( chris rock ) declares , " this is a crime scene ! "and teams up with a conscientious " phi beta capsule " 12-hour cold remedy called drixenol ( david hyde pierce ) to chase down and destroy the deadly " red death " virus ( laurence fishburne ) that's determined to take frank down in 48 hours , beating ebola and e .
watch out for mucus mudslides , chaos in cerebellum hall and the detritus from booger dam ( runny nose ) , along with comic turns from molly shannon and chris elliot , plus the voices of william shatner and brandy norwood .
 and that's * way * before ellen degeneres shows up  i didn't laugh at ellen degeneres much ( i think i was supposed to ) .
 it's best described this way : sultry sexpot/real estate agent sandra dunmore ( patricia arquette ) is married to jake , a " creative yet unfocused " ( and alcoholic ) advertising rep , played by dermot mulroney .
 it's best described this way : sultry sexpot/real estate agent sandra dunmore ( patricia arquette ) is married to jake , a " creative yet unfocused " ( and alcoholic ) advertising rep , played by dermot mulroney .
 sandra likes to act out her deep-seated sexual fantasies and jake's brother ben ( the suave-as-ever don johnson ) likes to help .
 the film opens with emily ( paltrow ) and david ( viggo mortensen ) 'having fun' in an loft apartment  the problem is , paltrow is married to stephen ( douglas ) , who is not too happy when he discovers this affair  if i was paltrow , though , i'd definitely go with mortensen  paltrow , showing immense talent in se7en ( 1995 ) and sliding doors ( 1997 ) is strangely stilted , even unconvincing , in this movie  the characters also make incredibly dumb moves , especially paltrow , and stephen appears to lose all intelligence in the last reel .
 the film opens with emily ( paltrow ) and david ( viggo mortensen ) 'having fun' in an loft apartment  if i was paltrow , though , i'd definitely go with mortensen  mortensen agrees , but the murder goes awry , and the twists keep on coming as the film progresses  mortensen is a little bit better , coming across as a younger douglas , but his role isn't meaty enough to show all his talent .
 the problem is , paltrow is married to stephen ( douglas ) , who is not too happy when he discovers this affair  ' also , the performances , apart from douglas , are below par  mortensen is a little bit better , coming across as a younger douglas , but his role isn't meaty enough to show all his talent  which leaves douglas to waltz away with the film , which is does  however , i doubt douglas finds it very hard to play a stogie smoking , drinking womanizer with a creepy underside  k , but there's some hackneyed sub-plot about douglas being a ruthless player on wall street ( again ) and the ending is surprisingly stupid and cliched  the last thing a thriller should be is boring , and although the film just barely manages to keep your interest thanks to michael douglas , you wouldn't be missing anything if you decided not to watch a perfect murder .
 the movie then lurches forward into the plight of al simmons ( michael jai white ) , a government assassin/operative who is murdered by diabolical boss jason wynn ( martin sheen , who plays all of his scenes like an oscar clip ) while on a top secret mission in a north korean biological weapons plant .
 the movie then lurches forward into the plight of al simmons ( michael jai white ) , a government assassin/operative who is murdered by diabolical boss jason wynn ( martin sheen , who plays all of his scenes like an oscar clip ) while on a top secret mission in a north korean biological weapons plant .
 simmons goes to hell and back , after making a deal with satan himself -- if he agrees to command the devil's army to overtake the world , he'll be allowed to return to earth to see his wife wanda ( underused theresa randle ) and little girl cyan ( sydni beaudoin ) .
 sweeney ) .
 his , uh , shoulder to cry on comes in the form of clown ( john leguizamo ) , a disgustingly disproportioned minion of satan's  poor leguizamo  leguizamo farts green mist , munches a pizza slice covered with maggots and even dons a mini-skirt and performs a cheerleader routine , all before turning into a giant grey demon .
 in an aggressively non-linear fashion , the limey ( li * mey , noun : an english gentleman ) tells the story of wilson ( terrence stamp ) , a british ex-con just released from a 9 year stint in prison for armed robbery  sixties icon terrence stamp manages to at least be menacing as the aging criminal .
 he's played by peter fonda , in his first major role since the terrific ulee's gold in 1997  peter fonda is an unbelievably underrated actor : he's shy , quiet but always effective .
there are moments of organized craziness as john phillips , leader of the mamas and the papas and one of the concert organizers , tries to get in touch with dionne warwick .
from otis redding to jimi hendrix , janis joplin to the mamas and the papas , and jefferson airplane to the who , this documentary is jam-packed with contagious energy and while the lyrics to " wild thing " may not be all that complicated , watching jimi hendrix mime having sex with his guitar is as captivating as otis redding singing about love .
from otis redding to jimi hendrix , janis joplin to the mamas and the papas , and jefferson airplane to the who , this documentary is jam-packed with contagious energy and while the lyrics to " wild thing " may not be all that complicated , watching jimi hendrix mime having sex with his guitar is as captivating as otis redding singing about love .
from otis redding to jimi hendrix , janis joplin to the mamas and the papas , and jefferson airplane to the who , this documentary is jam-packed with contagious energy it's impossible to tear your eyes away from janis joplin as she belts out her ballad about love being a ball and chain .
ingredients : neophyte lawyer , legal situations , corrupt insurance company ,synopsis : rudy baylor ( matt damon ) is an ethical kid fresh out of law school who must juggle three legal situations at the same time .
rudy is new to being a lawyer and is thoroughly outgunned , but luckily he is aided by a sleazy ambulance chaser ( danny devito ) who has failed the bar exam six times as well as by the kindly presiding judge ( danny glover ) .
rudy is new to being a lawyer and is thoroughly outgunned , but luckily he is aided by a sleazy ambulance chaser ( danny devito ) who has failed the bar exam six times as well as by the kindly presiding judge ( danny glover ) .
jon voight plays leo f .
you've seen all their faces - natalie portman ( the professional ) as queen amidala , liam neeson ( schindler's list ) as qui-gon jinn , ewan mcgregor ( trainspotting ) as obi-wan kenobi , and jake lloyd ( jingle all the way ) as young anakin skywalker portman's queen amidala and mcgregor's obi-wan kenobi don't fare nearly so well .
you've seen all their faces - natalie portman ( the professional ) as queen amidala , liam neeson ( schindler's list ) as qui-gon jinn , ewan mcgregor ( trainspotting ) as obi-wan kenobi , and jake lloyd ( jingle all the way ) as young anakin skywalker the most successful at this is liam neeson who , as qui-gon jinn , a jedi master to young obi-wan kenobi , has quiet dignity and a wise , commanding presence .
you've seen all their faces - natalie portman ( the professional ) as queen amidala , liam neeson ( schindler's list ) as qui-gon jinn , ewan mcgregor ( trainspotting ) as obi-wan kenobi , and jake lloyd ( jingle all the way ) as young anakin skywalker portman's queen amidala and mcgregor's obi-wan kenobi don't fare nearly so well and obi-wan , although mcgregor makes him very endearing , has so little screen time that he's nothing but a robin to qui-gon jinn's batman however , mcgregor does struggle manfully to infuse this surprisingly small supporting role with a spark of genuine insight and humanity , and he does a good job .
you've seen all their faces - natalie portman ( the professional ) as queen amidala , liam neeson ( schindler's list ) as qui-gon jinn , ewan mcgregor ( trainspotting ) as obi-wan kenobi , and jake lloyd ( jingle all the way ) as young anakin skywalker that's not jake lloyd's fault , though - he does a good job of being a cute kid , which is apparently all lucas asked of him .
he has a doting mother ( pernilla august , making her first english- language film ) and is a slave to a gross flying gnome on tatooine .
ben obi-wan kenobi , played by sir alec guinness , was one of those jedi who is still alive today the acting on everyone's part is great , especially that of sir alec guinness's .
while an attack on the ship that princess leia , played by carrie fisher , is aboard , she inserts a message to r2-d2 , who is also on the ship .
they are bought by luke skywalker's ( mark hamill ) family .
han solo , played by harrison ford , and his sidekick chewbacca , played by peter mayhew , are consulted about providing a ship to complete the tasks necessary .
han solo , played by harrison ford , and his sidekick chewbacca , played by peter mayhew , are consulted about providing a ship to complete the tasks necessary .
 exposition : a simple one - a bellhop , ted ( the totally overdone tim roth , who's a god and all , but not in this one , though he has a couple good moments ) is working on new year's eve for his first shift ( ! ! ! ) in an old fancy hotel  tim roth was probably payed a lot of money to do this stupid part in this stupid film made by a bunch of people who are high on themselves 'cause they've had hits , major or minor .
 the repeating cycle is as follows -- the president ( morgan freeman ) will go on tv and tell the country that there's a remote chance a comet will strike the earth , but that the nation's crack scientists and astronauts have some brilliant plan to stop the problem  the mission will barely fail , and freeman will tell the country that the comet is still headed toward earth , and there's a remote chance it will strike , but that the nation's crack scientists and astronauts have some brilliant plan to stop the problem  it goes on and on throughout the movie , but every time freeman goes on tv , we know his plan is going to fail  how do we know this ? because we've seen the tv ads for deep impact , ads that feature freeman telling the nation that " the comet is still headed right for us " and show disaster shots of the comet striking earth and the giant tidal wave spreading  upon a top-secret meeting with president freeman , leoni agrees to keep the story under wraps until the president can hold a press conference , at which she gets to ask the first question  that's when freeman has to come on tv for the last time and say goodbye to all the people who aren't picked to live in the missouri cave site for two years .
 the main character , played by tea leoni , is a low-level broadcast journalist for msnbc ( and that's the mere tip of the product-placement iceberg ) who stumbles upon a huge government conspiracy  upon a top-secret meeting with president freeman , leoni agrees to keep the story under wraps until the president can hold a press conference , at which she gets to ask the first question  leoni ends up in the anchor chair , broadcasting every step of the comet's collision course with earth  instead we watch as a lovestruck elijah wood defies all odds to chase down his young wife , while people pack the highways out of town .
 she thinks it's an instance of an ex-secretary of something or other ( james cromwell ) resigning because of a mistress , and that maybe he took the fall for the president in the same area  when she goes nosing around cromwell , he begs her to keep it under wraps .
 i mean , who can resist the story of your average joe becomming a celebrity by having his life filmed every minute of every day ? but this average joe , ed perkuny , ( matthew mcconaughay ) , is a sappy , lifeless creation that wanders around , trying to solve everyone's problems and settle his own .
 the rest of the cast is very good ; especially martin landau ( as ed's step-father ) , who plays a cute role as the close-to-death old guy that makes all the witty comments .
 jenna elfman is good , ( but a little overemotional ) ; her main problem is that she keeps getting sucked into bad films , i .
 ellen degeneres stood out as the executive who , after awhile , decides the show must not go on much to the opposite of the head exec , rob reiner's opinion .
 " ) elizabeth hurley is perfectly cast as the easy slut , and dennis hopper , in a quick cameo as ed's biological father , is a nice choice ( ironically coming after the role he turned down as christof in the truman show ) .
consequently , it is fortunate that their cast includes some of hollywood's finest character actors , such as bates , leigh and strathairn kathy bates plays the film's title character , and gives a sensational lead performance dolores claiborne is essentially a showcase for the talent of bates , as her character has a huge amount of screen time kathy bates' performance is award-calibre stuff however , the performances are uniformly excellent , particularly kathy bates , and the film has its moments .
child actor ellen muth is also worth noting as the young selena during the flashback sequences ; she is very impressive however , the performances are uniformly excellent , particularly kathy bates , and the film has its moments .
 27/98 )starring brad pitt , anthony hopkins , claire forlaniin " meet joe black " , brad pitt plays death death assumes the body of brad pitt , and from there , much trouble ensues for one thing , death-as-pitt falls in love with hopkins daughter , played by claire forlani there is also a sub-plot about forlani's ex-boyfriend ( she dumps him for pitt ) trying to take over hopkins company pitt , an actor i normally loathe , is actually quite engaging as death that has nothing to do with pitt's performance , of course , but it is a little distracting .
 27/98 )starring brad pitt , anthony hopkins , claire forlaniin " meet joe black " , brad pitt plays death death decides to take a holiday , what with all the rigors of soul-collecting and all , and forces anthony hopkins into showing him what it's like to be human for one thing , death-as-pitt falls in love with hopkins daughter , played by claire forlani obviously this enrages hopkins , because really , what can death offer ?besides eternal damnation , of course there is also a sub-plot about forlani's ex-boyfriend ( she dumps him for pitt ) trying to take over hopkins company hopkins gives his usual excellent performance .
 27/98 )starring brad pitt , anthony hopkins , claire forlaniin " meet joe black " , brad pitt plays death for one thing , death-as-pitt falls in love with hopkins daughter , played by claire forlani and in her first major studio role , claire forlani is surprisingly good .
with stars like sigourney weaver ( " alien " trilogy ) and academy award winner holly hunter ( the piano , raising arizona , etc .
with stars like sigourney weaver ( " alien " trilogy ) and academy award winner holly hunter ( the piano , raising arizona , etc .
 when stu and his girlfriend , julie ( bridget fonda ) are in a freak car accident ( you'll see ) stu goes into a coma , and while in his coma stu travels to i'm guessing dark town , where all the characters in dreams come to life  bridget fonda is dreary and seems to bring the film to a screeching halt , her performance is bad and she seems miscast .
 making a new friend kitty ( rose mcgowan ) he learns that if he gets an exit pass from death , he can go back up and live his life  for instance we really don't get to know who stu or julie are , so why should we even care ? kitty played well by rose mcgowan ha a story behind her , but we are not given a chance to know her .
 the cast is decent however , brendan fraser seems to be enjoying himself in the role as stu miley , but becomes awfully annoying when monkey bone takes over his body .
 the standout performance is the voice of nick turturro as monkey bone himself , he is very funny and entertaining and really keeps the film from being a total bust .
 dave foley isn't given enough to do , as well as " will & grace's " megan mullally who can be funny .
 claire danes and omar epps deliver their lines as if they are bored , which really transfers onto the audience .
 claire danes and omar epps deliver their lines as if they are bored , which really transfers onto the audience .
 the only one to escape relatively unscathed is giovanni ribisi , who plays the resident crazy man , ultimately being the only thing worth watching .
peter fonda gives his undoubtedly best performance in victor nu ? ez's new film and patricia richardson ( home improvement star ) shows she is worthy of big screen attention .
nu ? ez is probably independent film's greatest asset , along with john sayles , and he proves his talent with a slow pace and undulating , heavy tension .
peter fonda gives his undoubtedly best performance in victor nu ? ez's new film and patricia richardson ( home improvement star ) shows she is worthy of big screen attention peter fonda's performance borrows from his father henry fonda's in on golden pond- there is a great vulnerability that he gives the character ulee jackson and just like his father , peter fonda is quiet , emotional , and weary in this exceptional role what is admirable about the movie is peter fonda's winning turn as ulee and the story that feels like nobody's fool but , in the end , ends up in a class of its own .
who's on the up and up , who's the real bad guy and who's gonna get to bang courteney cox are just a few of the questions which will be answered by the rest of this movie and did i mention that courteney cox looked mega-hot in the movie ?no .
it's not very original , it goes on for a little too long , but costner and russell make it happen , as two shite-kickin' elvis lovers , who don't stop till they , more or less , drop but the true glue that holds this film together , other than the spirit of elvis himself , is costner and russell , who play their badass characters to the t  sure , russell's been down this road before , but costner surprised me with his nastiness and smoke 'em if you got 'em , folks !there is also this one really great show-down scene between costner and a cop , that'll have you crackin' up and lovin' it all at the same time i also like these types of " guy " movies a lot , and even though the film doesn't bring much originality to the table , it does offer a pretty coherent story , some nice twists and turns , humor and a big ol' helping of whoop-ass coming straight from costner and russell's respective boots .
it's not very original , it goes on for a little too long , but costner and russell make it happen , as two shite-kickin' elvis lovers , who don't stop till they , more or less , drop but the true glue that holds this film together , other than the spirit of elvis himself , is costner and russell , who play their badass characters to the t  sure , russell's been down this road before , but costner surprised me with his nastiness i also like these types of " guy " movies a lot , and even though the film doesn't bring much originality to the table , it does offer a pretty coherent story , some nice twists and turns , humor and a big ol' helping of whoop-ass coming straight from costner and russell's respective boots .
mark wahlberg stars as capt wahlberg plays davidson not as some gung-ho hero , but as a confused and somewhat frightened explorer who only wants to return home .
helena bonham carter is ari , the chimp who believes that apes and humans can live in peace and as equals .
michael clarke duncan is big and brutal as attar the gorilla aid to thade who blindly follows his leader until his faith is shaken .
a fine comic outing is given by paul giamatti as limbo , the ape slave trader making a living off the misery of the humans he captures .
another of burton's in-jokes is to have charlton heston , star of the original , play the chimpanzee father of tim roth's gen that is the famous line heston's taylor shouted at the conclusion of the original after discovering the planet's terrible secret .
 we learn late in the game that the kid belongs to fbi agent frank lacrosse ( dennis quaid ) , and that the kidnapper/killer is a nameless fiend that lacrosse has been tracking across the country for quite a while  what is danny glover doing here , grinning and yeehawing his way through the messy plot ? and dennis quaid ?  ( that monotone -- stop it ! ) ermey is solid in a supporting role that's more interesting than the two leads thrown together , but the charismatic leto ( claire danes' object of affection in " my so-called life " ) is a scene-stealer tried and true .
this season needs another serial killer movie like kathie lee gifford needs more public devastation  lee ermey ) is torn between his re-election campaign and helping his new ally catch his man  what is danny glover doing here , grinning and yeehawing his way through the messy plot ? and dennis quaid ?  ( that monotone -- stop it ! ) ermey is solid in a supporting role that's more interesting than the two leads thrown together , but the charismatic leto ( claire danes' object of affection in " my so-called life " ) is a scene-stealer tried and true .
 in a related aside , former railway worker bob goodall ( danny glover ) is cruising through the snowbound west in his pinup-plastered ( even on the seatbelts ) el dorado  what is danny glover doing here , grinning and yeehawing his way through the messy plot ? and dennis quaid ?  ( that monotone -- stop it ! ) ermey is solid in a supporting role that's more interesting than the two leads thrown together , but the charismatic leto ( claire danes' object of affection in " my so-called life " ) is a scene-stealer tried and true .
 along the way , he picks up -- and subsequently saves the life of -- hitchhiking loner lane dixon ( jared leto )  what is danny glover doing here , grinning and yeehawing his way through the messy plot ? and dennis quaid ?  ( that monotone -- stop it ! ) ermey is solid in a supporting role that's more interesting than the two leads thrown together , but the charismatic leto ( claire danes' object of affection in " my so-called life " ) is a scene-stealer tried and true .
 as was amply evident after basic instinct , sharon stone can play sensual roles with great abandon  babe ruth didn't quit baseball after one season to play football in a quixotic quest to prove his athletic dexterity , and neither should stone reject what she does best  janeane garofalo , for example , is no less wonderful an actress because she could have never pulled off stone's part in basic instinct ; neither is stone any less talented because she couldn't do garofalo's comedic roles  as the story opens , an angry gloria ( stone ) is being released from prison after 3 years confinement  add in the movie's almost non-existent background noise and the excruciatingly slow pacing , and you can hear the sounds of the lines falling to the ground like stones  you have to say this for stone : she can keep a straight face .
 just before his whole family is gunned down by hoods working for gloria's ex-boyfriend kevin ( jeremy northam ) , nicky's dad gives him a banana yellow floppy disk with secrets about kevin's operation and offers him a piece of fatherly advice .
 janeane garofalo , for example , is no less wonderful an actress because she could have never pulled off stone's part in basic instinct ; neither is stone any less talented because she couldn't do garofalo's comedic roles .
 i don't know if kumble was trying to evoke comedy or tragedy out of his opening scene where marci greenbaum ( tara reid ) whines about having nude photos of her posted on the internet , but the only emotion i felt was sheer boredom .
 joe ( matthew modine ) is a struggling actor , or he claims to be one , even though he has no credits under his belt  matthew modine and catherine keener have the most sympathetic characters in the film , but they're stuck in the most boring plotlines .
 his girlfriend , mary ( catherine keener ) has no pretensions about her career : she's a makeup artist , working for the eccentric fashion photographer blair ( marlo thomas ) and supermodel of the month , sahara ( bridgette wilson )  matthew modine and catherine keener have the most sympathetic characters in the film , but they're stuck in the most boring plotlines .
 his girlfriend , mary ( catherine keener ) has no pretensions about her career : she's a makeup artist , working for the eccentric fashion photographer blair ( marlo thomas ) and supermodel of the month , sahara ( bridgette wilson ) .
 his girlfriend , mary ( catherine keener ) has no pretensions about her career : she's a makeup artist , working for the eccentric fashion photographer blair ( marlo thomas ) and supermodel of the month , sahara ( bridgette wilson ) .
 however , bob has gotten his biggest break yet : a starring role on a soap opera opposite the beautiful kelly ( daryl hannah ) , who may be that illusive woman he's always pursued : a real blonde .
 and it's not even because this was a film starring nicolas cage and since he gives a brauvara performance , this film is hardly worth his talents  in one very very very long steadicam shot , we meet the protagonist , crooked atlantic city detective , rick santoro ( cage ) , and follow him before a boxing match as he talks on his cell phone with his wife , interupts a pay-per-view event on tv , chases down a gambler , enters the arena all pumped up for the fight , sits down and talks with his bud , kevin dunne ( gary sinise , who's character should not be confused with that of actor kevin dunn , who's also in this ) , and watches as it happens .
 as we follow rick trying to learn of more information , we also meet a woman who was talking to kirkland before he was shot ( carla gugino ) , and who flees the scene in a panic , and tries to hide from the cops in the arena and the adjacent casino/hotel since the cops have blocked off the doors so they can get witness' takes on what happened .
 there's a big name in the crowd , and that's the secretary of defense , charles kirkland ( joel fabiani ) , who's sitting behind rick , and who gets shot a second after the heavyweight champion , lincoln tyler ( stan shaw ) , is knocked out .
 there's a big name in the crowd , and that's the secretary of defense , charles kirkland ( joel fabiani ) , who's sitting behind rick , and who gets shot a second after the heavyweight champion , lincoln tyler ( stan shaw ) , is knocked out .
 in one very very very long steadicam shot , we meet the protagonist , crooked atlantic city detective , rick santoro ( cage ) , and follow him before a boxing match as he talks on his cell phone with his wife , interupts a pay-per-view event on tv , chases down a gambler , enters the arena all pumped up for the fight , sits down and talks with his bud , kevin dunne ( gary sinise , who's character should not be confused with that of actor kevin dunn , who's also in this ) , and watches as it happens .
cartoon star roger rabbit is blowing takes and having trouble keeping his mind on work , so hard-boiled private detective eddie valiant ( bob hoskins ) is called in by studio head r also bob hoskins' performance should be credited according to the internet movie database , hoskins studied his young daughter to learn how to act with imaginary characters and i guess his hard work paid off .
maroon ( alan tilvern ) to try to help get roger's mind back on work .
valiant takes some photos of jessica playing , `patty cake' with marvin acme ( stubby kaye ) , the owner of toontown ( where all of the cartoon characters live ) and takes them to maroon .
 ( jack black ) have been best friends since the fifth grade  thinking about it , this is a real mishmash of contrivance and coincidence that is held together solely by the comedic efforts of steve zahn and jack black  jack black has the big-guy moves of a chris farley , giving j  at least , with " saving silverman , " we get a couple of funny perfs from zahn and black .
darren ( jason biggs ) , wayne ( steve zahn ) , and j  thinking about it , this is a real mishmash of contrivance and coincidence that is held together solely by the comedic efforts of steve zahn and jack black  steve zahn has been steadily honing his comedic acting skills and gives some complexity to wayne , the " brains " of the gang  at least , with " saving silverman , " we get a couple of funny perfs from zahn and black .
 but , when darren meets an attractive , but cold-blooded and manipulative , psychiatrist , judith ( amanda peet ) , the long time friendship is placed in danger  nothing works until the duo come up with a plan - kidnap judith and get darren back together with the girl he called his one and only , pretty sandy perkus ( amanda detmer )  amanda peet is caustic as the manipulative judith  amanda detmer brings nothing ( or gets nothing ) as darren's one and only .
darren ( jason biggs ) , wayne ( steve zahn ) , and j  jason biggs is the straight man of the musketeers and gets very little to do ; though having watched his previous films ( " american pie " and " loser " ) i'm not sure what attraction biggs actually has .
gladly joining that bunch is u-571 , which stars matthew mcconaughey as the executive officer of a u mcconaughey's crew then receives orders that they will be boarding a disabled german submarine to steal the enigma , a german communications encoding device that has stumped allied intelligence the mission goes horribly wrong however , and as a result , mcconaughey and only a handful of his crew ( as well as a captured german ) become trapped aboard the u-571 in enemy waters .
we learn he has been denied a recommendation for his own command by his superior ( bill paxton ) .
deuce bigalow ( rob schneider ) cleans fish tanks  the good news is that sandler doesn't actually appear in " deuce " and that rob schneider and eddie griffin are funnier than sandler .
 one of his customers is antoine leconte ( oded fehr ) , a successful gigolo .
 ( eddie griffin ) , a pimp for " man-whores , " who arranges for deuce to service an assortment of women whose imperfections keep them from dating  the good news is that sandler doesn't actually appear in " deuce " and that rob schneider and eddie griffin are funnier than sandler .
 ) deuce's life is complicated by a bothersome cop ( william forsythe ) looking for information on antoine and by kate's discovery of his man-whoring .
i don't expect much from eddie murphy these days  then the klump family , all played by eddie murphy , step in for some comedic relief involving old people having sex , flabby breasts , a slew of fart and dick jokes , and enough fat people jokes that i lost count after the first thirty minutes  eddie murphy will be signed up to take not just one role or five roles , but he'll play every character in the movie  i just can't wait to see eddie murphy in a love scene with himself .
 with love on his mind , sherman is determined to rid himself of his alter ego , buddy love from the first professor , who still resides with vigor inside his psyche and causes sherman to act like a bad imitation of vince vaughn from swingers .
 natalie portman is plagued by hideous costumes and a poor script , but she delivers a spunky performance .
 ) they also meet the future darth vadar , anakin skywalker ( jake lloyd ) star wars is largely a failure in all the major areas of filmmaking : script , direction and characters  and jake lloyd looks at everyone with hateful eyes and delivers his lines in a bored voice .
every morning and evening , carlos nunez ( jay hernandez ) takes a two-hour bus ride in order to attend pacific high school as carlos , hernandez is a revelation .
all is well until he meets nicole oakley ( kirsten dunst ) , the daughter of a rich congressman ( bruce davison ) cute-as-a-button dunst forces the viewer to share the pain beneath nicole's behavior .
all is well until he meets nicole oakley ( kirsten dunst ) , the daughter of a rich congressman ( bruce davison ) .
 the fight scenes between jason scott lee and kurt russell seem laboured , slow and sluggish , and could have done with better choreography  russell who is usually a good actor in b-grade action flicks is unusually hampered by his character ? sergeant todd , who seems more like a sergeant toad .
 the fight scenes between jason scott lee and kurt russell seem laboured , slow and sluggish , and could have done with better choreography .
tim robbins and martin lawernce team up in this road movie comedy .
 this film should really be called beverly hills midnight run there's lawernce with his wisecracking and heavy profanity , just like eddie murphy in beverly hills cop , and pratically the same idea as midnight run  lawerence gives a good eddie murphy performance , and robbin's is alright aswell .
 even the credit sequence seemed to be out of a steve martin , or chevy chase , eighties comedy  in planes , trains and automobiles , there was real chemistry between steve martin and john candy .
 in planes , trains and automobiles , there was real chemistry between steve martin and john candy .
woody harrelson gives an excellent performance .
larry flynt's wife , althea leasure is played by courtney love larry meets althea at one of his clubs , and they fall in love ( a very sexual and open love ) courtney love obviously has a great understanding for althea's situation , as she is brilliant in portraying althea in every respect .
edward norton plays flynt's lawyer , alan isaacman .
rush hour features jackie chan in his first u what makes rush hour work so damn well is the chemistry between the energetic chan and the absolutely hilarious tucker tucker mouths off to chan at every given opportunity ( " i'm michael jackson , you tito  " ) , and chan delivers a few zingers of his own , as well as some terrific fight scenes a particular fight scene in a chinese office , where chan and tucker duke it out with the bad guys , is funny and energetic at the same time  chandelivers yet another fantastic stunt for the fans with a 10-story drop .
of course , the fbi is upset that he'll be interfering in their investigation , and stick him with an lapd office with a big mouth- of course , that's chris tucker what makes rush hour work so damn well is the chemistry between the energetic chan and the absolutely hilarious tucker tucker mouths off to chan at every given opportunity ( " i'm michael jackson , you tito a particular fight scene in a chinese office , where chan and tucker duke it out with the bad guys , is funny and energetic at the same time .
bob the happy bastard's quickie review :rush hourso what's the problem with 48 hours clones these days ?they always try for the same thing that eddie murphy and nick nolte had .
bob the happy bastard's quickie review :rush hourso what's the problem with 48 hours clones these days ?they always try for the same thing that eddie murphy and nick nolte had .
the last line ( or near to that honor ) is the great butler , alfred ( the ubergod , michael gough ) saying , " i think we need a bigger bat cave , " or something to that note .
 meanwhile , another villain shows up , poison ivy ( uma ! ) , who was a dorky scientist chick working on flowers in south america with a twistet scientist ( john glover ) who kills her when she finds out he's used her research to develop an uberman , bane , who is basically a man pumped with chemicals which probably killed any personality he ever had .
 meanwhile , in an unfinished subplot , bruce ( batman's alter-ego , if you forgot ) has been dating the lovely julie madison ( the even lovlier elle macpherson ) who wants a commitment after a year but he says nothing .
 for all this , i can't even comment on george clooney as batman - i hardly saw the guy ! and when i did , he had horrible dialogue to say .
 one wouldn't think that two genuine movie stars , antonio banderas ( evita ) and rebecca de mornay ( hand that rocks the cradle ) , and the acerbic comic genius dennis miller ( " saturday night live " ) would be involved in such a celluloid backfire as this turkey  not only are they in it , however , but de mornay executive produced it  regardless of motive , de mornay and banderas strip down and have sex several times in what passes for eroticism  suspense at its very derivative ! as stated before , never talk to strangers is a poor excuse for a film whose sole purpose seems to be exploiting banderas and de mornay's bodies as often as possible .
 one wouldn't think that two genuine movie stars , antonio banderas ( evita ) and rebecca de mornay ( hand that rocks the cradle ) , and the acerbic comic genius dennis miller ( " saturday night live " ) would be involved in such a celluloid backfire as this turkey  regardless of motive , de mornay and banderas strip down and have sex several times in what passes for eroticism  suspense at its very derivative ! as stated before , never talk to strangers is a poor excuse for a film whose sole purpose seems to be exploiting banderas and de mornay's bodies as often as possible .
 one wouldn't think that two genuine movie stars , antonio banderas ( evita ) and rebecca de mornay ( hand that rocks the cradle ) , and the acerbic comic genius dennis miller ( " saturday night live " ) would be involved in such a celluloid backfire as this turkey  comedian dennis miller is completely wasted here ( he's not given lines that are suitable for his persona ) and doesn't even appear all that much .
 then one day his father ( ralph cotterill ) appears .
he is the premise for bad boy bubby , a defiantly original australian movie about a man called bubby ( nicholas hope ) who has spent his entire life in an awful little apartment , etc .
he is , however , rather pleased at renewing his acquaintance with the mother ( claire benito ) , and , more to the point , her ample breasts .
he is seduced by a young woman from a salvation army band ( how an anti-social half-wit with no sense of hygiene manages to get laid mere hours after his escape is not the sort of question the film encourages , wisely ) ; he is given free pizza by a sympathetic waitress ; he insults a traffic cop and is punched in the stomach ; he shares a few beers in the back of a truck with a rock group ; he is imprisoned and raped ; he becomes a translator for mentally handicapped people whose speech is impaired beyond comprehension ; he is loved by a motherly large-breasted nurse ( carmel johnson ) .
an occurrence of freakish solar activity allows police detective john sullivan ( james caviezel ) to speak to his fireman father frank sullivan ( dennis quaid ) through a ham radio , despite the fact that frank has been dead for 30 years .
an occurrence of freakish solar activity allows police detective john sullivan ( james caviezel ) to speak to his fireman father frank sullivan ( dennis quaid ) through a ham radio , despite the fact that frank has been dead for 30 years .
 the film wishes to paint its central character as a hero , but the viewer's only response to his " heroism " is intellectual : william wallace ( producer-director mel gibson ) is fighting for freedom and against tyranny , so we have to root for him  gibson portrays wallace in such a way that the audience cannot relate to him or identify with him .
mother and daughter , played in a brilliant performance by parker posey , are both varying degrees of wacko the chemistry between parker posey and josh hamilton is nothing short of amazing .
the chemistry between parker posey and josh hamilton is nothing short of amazing .
as the two twins' younger brother , anthony , freddie prinze jr .
she explains to marty's new fiancee , lesly ( tori spelling ) , soon after their first meeting that jackie-o was holding marty's private part when she came out of the womb .
the long kiss goodnight ( r ) meryl streep tried it and failed what makes her so effective and why she should succeed where streep and lee failed is that she doesn't take herself too seriously .
even pamela anderson lee made an attempt but fell flat on her well-bared assets .
however , geena davis could very well become the first bankable american female action star with the long kiss goodnight , a preposterous but incredibly fun action thriller directed by her husband , renny harlin davis plays samantha caine , a mousy suburban school teacher and mother whose memories only go back eight years but there's no argument that the more unbelievable sequences are original and entertaining as hell : who can resist the sight of davis tossing her daughter from a hole in her house into the nearby treehouse or chasing after a car while ice skating ?jackson and davis make a good team as good as he is , the one who should benefit the most from this project is davis , who shows much promise as an action heroine but should the public embrace the film and , in turn , the notion of a kick-ass female , davis could have found her special niche it seems as if davis and harlin's first collaboration , the middling pirate epic cutthroat island , was just a dress rehearsal ( albeit a very costly one ) for long kiss , in which the wife-husband team hit their action stride .
with the help of ethically questionable private detective mitch hennessey ( samuel l .
 he meets a slinky young woman ( joan chen ) and has a torrid night of lovemaking with her -- and then manages to witness her death at the hands of an evil ninja clan and their leader ( john lone ) .
 he meets a slinky young woman ( joan chen ) and has a torrid night of lovemaking with her -- and then manages to witness her death at the hands of an evil ninja clan and their leader ( john lone ) .
 lambert eventually finds pseudo-safety with a long-haired modern-day samurai ( yoshio harada ) and his partner -- yoko shimada , who you may remember as lady toda buntaro in shogun .
 it has a tender moment between * forbidden lovers * ben affleck and liv tyler , with , with , animal crackers ! and it has will patton as a long lost husband trying to reunite with his separated wife and child , who thinks he's a salesman ! gurgle , * sniff * , awwwww .
 it has a tender moment between * forbidden lovers * ben affleck and liv tyler , with , with , animal crackers ! and it has will patton as a long lost husband trying to reunite with his separated wife and child , who thinks he's a salesman ! gurgle , * sniff * , awwwww  any film that could take the indie-films' most valuable talents , and throw it all away with a bruce willis vehicle , a hundred-million dollar budget , but have cheap-o sets and lousy special effects , is , bottom line , living proof that hell exists , and has made a multi-picture deal with universal .
 and it has steve buscemi as a _genius_ who wants to work for an oil rig ? knee-slap ! ! isn't this just so , so , funny ! ? armageddon also has romance , with a capital " r "  and it has steve buscemi spewing more one-liners about minors and strippers  like , drill , darn it , drill ! ! ! and , let's have inept people destroy the mir space station ! ! can't you hear your heart beating ! ? and steve buscemi goes crazy and starts shooting at people ! ! what drama ! ! lastly , armageddon is out there to save the planet , with a capital " p " .
 it stars bruce willis , who has a hundred one-liners ! it has a tiny rock land directly in the middle of a heated argument in new york city ! ! and , chuckle , chuckle , one of those new yorkers , _survives_ , with charcoal all over his face ! ! snorkle , * sniff * , hiccup  any film that could take the indie-films' most valuable talents , and throw it all away with a bruce willis vehicle , a hundred-million dollar budget , but have cheap-o sets and lousy special effects , is , bottom line , living proof that hell exists , and has made a multi-picture deal with universal .
 ben affleck displayed his comedic talents in dogma and boiler room , and even on saturday night live directly after the horrible forces of nature and 200 cigarettes  we have all seen ben affleck have some fun on the set , it is so apparent in a number of scenes in good will hunting when he exchanges jokes with his friends at a bar  the story follows a man , rudy ( ben affleck ) , who is leaving prison in a few days along with his best friend and cellmate nick ( james frain ) .
 even charlize theron , who i was convinced couldn't act , did a decent job in cider house rules  nick has been exchanging love letters with a beautiful woman , ashley ( charlize theron ) , and cannot wait to leave prison and meet her in person .
 reindeer games is the complete opposite ; the actors don't seem to want to be their characters ( even danny trejo , who will do practically anything , doesn't look like he is enjoying himself ) , causing the audience to quickly lose interest .
 the story follows a man , rudy ( ben affleck ) , who is leaving prison in a few days along with his best friend and cellmate nick ( james frain ) .
 capsule review : a question : after the floating baby ruth that was waterworld , what in the @$&% were the hollywood execs who gave kevin costner the money to make another post-apocalyptic movie thinking ? in this 3 hour advertisement for his new hair weave , costner plays a nameless drifter who dons a long dead postal employee's uniform and gradually turns a nuked-out usa into an idealized hippy-dippy society .
it seems that star humphry bogart spend about 85 percent of the movie with various leaders of the nation instead of with ingred bergman .
it seems that star humphry bogart spend about 85 percent of the movie with various leaders of the nation instead of with ingred bergman .
hey , hollywood , how about this : a remake with harrison ford and anne heche ?now that would be a classic .
hey , hollywood , how about this : a remake with harrison ford and anne heche ?now that would be a classic .
inheriting the mantle from last year's " winner , " matthew mcconaughey , is matt damon , and , like mcconaughey , he proves to be more than just a fresh young face , as evidenced in two radically different projects currently in release--john grisham's the rainmaker and good will hunting damon has his first major starring role , a la mcconaughey , in a john grisham adaptation--in this case , francis ford coppola's take on the rainmaker .
inheriting the mantle from last year's " winner , " matthew mcconaughey , is matt damon , and , like mcconaughey , he proves to be more than just a fresh young face , as evidenced in two radically different projects currently in release--john grisham's the rainmaker and good will hunting damon has his first major starring role , a la mcconaughey , in a john grisham adaptation--in this case , francis ford coppola's take on the rainmaker damon plays wet-behind-the-ears attorney rudy baylor , who , immediately after passing the bar exam , finds himself representing the mother ( mary kay place ) of a terminally ill young man ( john whitworth ) in a big-league suit against a negligent insurance company then , of course , there is damon , who nicely juggles the weighty ( the insurance case , the spousal abuse ) and the humorous ( rudy's often comical naivete ) requirements of his role without missing a beat as good as he is in the rainmaker , damon showcases the depth of his talent in good will hunting , directed by gus van sant and written by actor ben affleck and damon himself damon plays the title character , will hunting , a troubled young construction worker/janitor at mit who also happens to be a supergenius good will hunting is the touchy-feely enterprise its plot synopsis suggests , but to simply dismiss it as that would be to discount the true emotional chords affleck and damon's intelligent script touches the clear standout in the cast , though , is damon , who bravely does not soften will's prickly nature but has such a natural ease with the audience that it is hard _not_ to care for him so many names come and go with the fluctuations of the hollywood hype machine , but based on his impressive work in john grisham's the rainmaker and especially good will hunting , it is a safe bet that matt damon is one name we will be hearing a lot more of in the years to come .
damon plays wet-behind-the-ears attorney rudy baylor , who , immediately after passing the bar exam , finds himself representing the mother ( mary kay place ) of a terminally ill young man ( john whitworth ) in a big-league suit against a negligent insurance company while rudy's ( and the film's ) main concern is this case , he also finds time to protect a young wife ( claire danes ) from her abusive husband ( melrose placer andrew shue , in a mercifully brief role ) .
inheriting the mantle from last year's " winner , " matthew mcconaughey , is matt damon , and , like mcconaughey , he proves to be more than just a fresh young face , as evidenced in two radically different projects currently in release--john grisham's the rainmaker and good will hunting damon has his first major starring role , a la mcconaughey , in a john grisham adaptation--in this case , francis ford coppola's take on the rainmaker damon plays wet-behind-the-ears attorney rudy baylor , who , immediately after passing the bar exam , finds himself representing the mother ( mary kay place ) of a terminally ill young man ( john whitworth ) in a big-league suit against a negligent insurance company so many names come and go with the fluctuations of the hollywood hype machine , but based on his impressive work in john grisham's the rainmaker and especially good will hunting , it is a safe bet that matt damon is one name we will be hearing a lot more of in the years to come .
coppola's most notable--and effective--contribution to the tried-and-true grisham formula is a sense of humor about itself , which largely comes in the presence of danny devito ( as rudy's unlicensed co-counsel ) and golden globe nominee jon voight ( as the insurance company's hotshot attorney ) .
 not to be outdone in her quest to regain the attention of john proctor ( daniel day lewis ) , abigail ( winona ryder ) suddenly seizes a chicken , beats it against the ground and smears her face and lips with the fresh blood .
 not to be outdone in her quest to regain the attention of john proctor ( daniel day lewis ) , abigail ( winona ryder ) suddenly seizes a chicken , beats it against the ground and smears her face and lips with the fresh blood .
 abigail seizes on this opportunity to rid herself of her rival for john proctor's love , his wife elizabeth ( joan allen ) , by including her among those accused of witchcraft .
 paul scofield is fine as the overzealous judge danforth , but the incessant moral posturings of all the characters along with the recurrent histrionics of the young girls pricks at the nerves .
i've never been a member of the robin williams fan club in his films , williams has often tried to balance his mania with touchy-feely emotion , leading to wildly uneven performances doubtfire seemed ready-made for the same problems , but instead it proves to be williams' best comic screen project yet williams stars as daniel hillard , a cartoon voiceover artist with a penchant for irresponsible behavior after getting off to a slow start involving too much of williams' riffing , mrs clearly , most of the credit for doubtfire's success goes to robin williams it took putting him in drag , but for once he plays a comic character that isn't just robin williams with a different name the supporting players merely step aside and allow williams to do his thing and it's nice to see robin williams just act for a change .
one such incident proves one too many for wife miranda ( sally field ) , and she files for a divorce as miranda , sally field is solid in a background role , and pierce brosnan is nicely understated as stu .
he turns to his brother frank ( harvey fierstein ) , a theatrical makeup artist , and emerges as euphegenia doubtfire , a matronly 65-year-old englishwoman .
daniel uses his access to the house to keep an eye on miranda's flirtation with a wealthy client ( pierce brosnan ) , to spend time with the children , and to learn something about responsible parenting , all the while trying to keep his identity hidden from the people who know him best as miranda , sally field is solid in a background role , and pierce brosnan is nicely understated as stu .
the children are also good , although mara wilson is almost oppressively cute as the youngest .
 it's also a depressing waste of talent , with the solid team of michael keaton and andy garcia unthankfully thrown thankless lead roles , not to mention once-cool director barbet schroeder sadly continuing his string of not-cool flicks -- this thriller is more " before and after " than " reversal of fortune  even worse , the only compatible donor is violent sociopath peter mccabe ( michael keaton ) , currently serving a life sentence for multiple murders and other various crimes against society  there are countless scenes where the good guys catch up to keaton only to have him grab a hostage and get away  cast against type , michael keaton's understated menace is highly effective .
 it's also a depressing waste of talent , with the solid team of michael keaton and andy garcia unthankfully thrown thankless lead roles , not to mention once-cool director barbet schroeder sadly continuing his string of not-cool flicks -- this thriller is more " before and after " than " reversal of fortune  san francisco cop frank connor ( garcia ) is a single parent with a troubling dilemma -- his son matt ( joseph cross ) is stricken with cancer which only a bone marrow transplant can push into remission  also , the movie is so intent on giving you a hoot-inducing , lip-smacking villain ( the ads have compared peter mccabe to hannibal lechter , natch ) that it completely casts garcia's frank connor by the dullsville wayside ; " desperate measures " appears to like its antagonist so much more than its protagonist , and the movie's head-scratcher of a send-off confirms this  although he's not given much believable to work with , andy garcia plays off a taut emotional chord .
 san francisco cop frank connor ( garcia ) is a single parent with a troubling dilemma -- his son matt ( joseph cross ) is stricken with cancer which only a bone marrow transplant can push into remission  joseph cross , as garicia's ailing son , is surprisingly unsentimental , and marcia gay harden lends solid support as a doctor who becomes a major player in the unfolding chaos .
 when he does make a run for it , connor offers close pursuit , but for different reasons than his superiors ( including the crusty brian cox ) -- they want to take mccabe down , while connor needs to keep him alive , or all hope is lost for his little boy .
 joseph cross , as garicia's ailing son , is surprisingly unsentimental , and marcia gay harden lends solid support as a doctor who becomes a major player in the unfolding chaos .
 that character is steve rubell , played with more perceptiveness by mike myers than this limp production deserves  steve rubell is the owner of studio 54 , and if christopher had focused on him , then myers could have forced a good film out of this wreck all by himself  only myers , by sheer force of talent , manages to rise above christopher's wading-pool of a script  rubell has been written just as depthless as the rest of the characters , but myers is good enough to inject subtleties that help round out the performance  in fact , myers is the sole reason to see 54 , and all it really does is make you wish that the film had revolved around him  aside from myers' performance , 54 is a complete failure .
 alas , we are instead guided to endure the trials of a young man named shane ( ryan phillippe ) , a going-nowhere new jersey teen who gets a job in the club , thanks to rubell's homosexual impulses   ( some of the scenes with his father border on interesting , while heather matarazzo , who plays his sister , pushes phillippe off the screen  and phillippe has almost no presence whatsoever ; this performance pales in comparison to mark whalberg's star-making role in boogie nights .
 it's here that he meets his friends , the array of uninteresting characters : his co-worker , greg ( brecklin meyer ) , his wife , anita ( salma hayek ) , and , of course , the love interest , julie black ( neve campbell )  meyer is endearing , but allowed to be no deeper than cardboard .
 it's here that he meets his friends , the array of uninteresting characters : his co-worker , greg ( brecklin meyer ) , his wife , anita ( salma hayek ) , and , of course , the love interest , julie black ( neve campbell )  hayek is an energetic , talented young actress , and does almost nothing here .
 it's here that he meets his friends , the array of uninteresting characters : his co-worker , greg ( brecklin meyer ) , his wife , anita ( salma hayek ) , and , of course , the love interest , julie black ( neve campbell )  why his " friends " push him into drugs is never really explained , but the fact that they are " friends " is questioned only is superficial ways ( greg gets really mad at shane because he's been elevated to bartender status )  campbell is a talented actress , but she needs a role that gives her a little depth  he seems dumb and misguided , and his voice never changes tone .
 1 ) we never see how cesar ( antonio banderas ) and vince ( woody harrelson ) meet .
 1 ) we never see how cesar ( antonio banderas ) and vince ( woody harrelson ) meet .
 3 ) the third character on the trip , grace ( lolita davidovich ) stands in the way .
 vince is convinced that he sees jesus on a regular basis , cesar yells at the sky in spanish when he is angry , and grace tries to sell her inventions to hotel owner robert wagner .
 bo dietl ( pronounced deedle , baldwin ) is one tough cop , a guy who is being investigated by hardass fbi agents due to his association with the ny mafia  baldwin , though he occasionally slips into an impression of his brother alec , does a fine job as one tough cop .
 on top of that problem , he has a drunk , gambling addicted partner ( penn ) who has a penchant for collecting parking tickets ( i guess cops aren't immune ? )  penn , who also slips into an impression of his brother sean , is even better as a loser tough guy cop .
 then , throw into the mix the femme fatale ( gershon ) .
 aside from being asked to accept michael mcglone as a mafioso ( an insult if you ask me ) the performances were pretty good  it screams sidney lumet all over the place , perhaps because it was produced by marty and michael bregman , producers of lumet's dog day afternoon and serpico .
 " --- a rapist ( matt frewer ) responds to supergirl's ( helen slater ) query as to why she's being attacked , an example of the mind-numbingly bad dialogue in supergirl .
 " --- a rapist ( matt frewer ) responds to supergirl's ( helen slater ) query as to why she's being attacked , an example of the mind-numbingly bad dialogue in supergirl  one day the founder of argo city , zaltar ( peter o' toole ) , gives the omegahedron to superman's cousin , kara ( helen slater ) , for use as inspiration in her art  it's all too obvious that helen slater is hooked to wires  helen slater effectively portrays supergirl as the innocent , naive character she's written to be , as she's able to gaze at flowers and bunnies with the right amount of genuine wonder to make it believable .
 i know it's hated amongst the superman faithful who dismiss it as nothing more than a vehicle for richard pryor , but i still think it's a worthy addition to the man of steel franchise .
 one day the founder of argo city , zaltar ( peter o' toole ) , gives the omegahedron to superman's cousin , kara ( helen slater ) , for use as inspiration in her art  the power source travels directly to earth and lands in the bowl of dip belonging to a minor-league witch named selena ( faye dunaway ) who , immediately before her dip was ruined , announced her desires to rule the world to her sometimes warlock boyfriend nigel ( peter cook )  faye dunaway and peter o'toole ham it up unmercifully , however when o'toole overacts he's entertaining and when dunaway does it she's annoying ( her character actually says the line " seize them ! " at one point )  dunaway's henchmen ( played by peter cook and brenda vaccaro ) fare much better , with vaccaro coming off best as the equivalent of ned beatty's otis character from the first two superman movies  the additions mainly consist of scene extensions which don't add much of note , except for a few moments which lengthen peter o'toole's screen time ( particularly during his latter appearances ) .
 the power source travels directly to earth and lands in the bowl of dip belonging to a minor-league witch named selena ( faye dunaway ) who , immediately before her dip was ruined , announced her desires to rule the world to her sometimes warlock boyfriend nigel ( peter cook )  faye dunaway and peter o'toole ham it up unmercifully , however when o'toole overacts he's entertaining and when dunaway does it she's annoying ( her character actually says the line " seize them ! " at one point )  dunaway's henchmen ( played by peter cook and brenda vaccaro ) fare much better , with vaccaro coming off best as the equivalent of ned beatty's otis character from the first two superman movies .
 the film stars eddie murphy as a mystical-ish figure named g on a strange journey of some sort when he comes across two network execs ( jeff goldblum and kelly preston ) with a flat tire on their hands  murphy lends nothing to his character and poor goldblum looks as if he'd rather be someplace else .
 the film stars eddie murphy as a mystical-ish figure named g on a strange journey of some sort when he comes across two network execs ( jeff goldblum and kelly preston ) with a flat tire on their hands  at this point in the movie , of course , morality comes into play , particularly on goldblum , who suddenly feels he can market the magical g into megabucks to get in good with his boss ( robert loggia )  murphy lends nothing to his character and poor goldblum looks as if he'd rather be someplace else .
 the film stars eddie murphy as a mystical-ish figure named g on a strange journey of some sort when he comes across two network execs ( jeff goldblum and kelly preston ) with a flat tire on their hands .
 somehow he ends up in their car and on their channel , a line-up of infomercial programs featuring the likes of betty white , morgan fairchild , and a slew of other celebrities and nameless figures  only a real zippy sequence involving frying morgan fairchild's face seems to have any interest in the movie .
 somehow he ends up in their car and on their channel , a line-up of infomercial programs featuring the likes of betty white , morgan fairchild , and a slew of other celebrities and nameless figures .
in this new 1998 version of great expectations a poor florida lad named finn ( ethan hawke ) with a talent for drawing has an early memory of helping an escaped convict ( robert de niro ) ethan hawke is romantic lead  )hawke plays a lovestruck , earnest and unchanged finn throughout the film .
in this new 1998 version of great expectations a poor florida lad named finn ( ethan hawke ) with a talent for drawing has an early memory of helping an escaped convict ( robert de niro )  dinsmoor , while robert de niro carries off the convict part suitably .
but soon the focus of finn's life becomes romance , as he develops a lifelong infatuation with estella ( gwyneth paltrow ) , an upper crust girl with some psychological and emotional issues due to being raised in a dysfunctional environment now in great expectations he gets to chase gwyneth paltrow , a rail-thin blonde meanwhile paltrow portrays estella as alternating between infuriating tease and ice princess ; estella's whole purpose is to get men to fall in love and then hurt them rather than become intimate .
 dinsmoor ( anne bancroft ) , an eccentric , aged and embittered , man-hating single aunt whose groom left her abandoned at the altar on the day of her marriage anne bancroft goes a little overboard as the deranged and pessimistic ms .
iron monkey ( actually a reissue of a 1993 film ) is the story of a 19th chinese vigilante ( rongguang yu ) , fighting with his own unique style of shaolin kung fu for the rights of the oppressed and the bellies of the hungry .
unlike drunken master 2 , which stars jackie chan as an adult fei-hong , iron monkey finds a much younger fei-hong ( sze-man tsang ) and his father wong kei-ying ( yen chi dan ) thrust into the middle of iron monkey's fight against oppression .
but too often hollywood gets it wrong , even when they pay off chinese directors iron monkey ( actually a reissue of a 1993 film ) is the story of a 19th chinese vigilante ( rongguang yu ) , fighting with his own unique style of shaolin kung fu for the rights of the oppressed and the bellies of the hungry but it is also a piece of the narrative of legendary chinese film hero wong fei-hong , most recently seen in one of the most overlooked , and possibly best films of 2000 , drunken master 2 ( released in the u unlike drunken master 2 , which stars jackie chan as an adult fei-hong , iron monkey finds a much younger fei-hong ( sze-man tsang ) and his father wong kei-ying ( yen chi dan ) thrust into the middle of iron monkey's fight against oppression  at times , fighting styles , especially that of monkey himself , do devolve into the ridiculous twinkle-toed floating of films like crouching tiger , hidden dragon , director yuen wo ping eventually remembers to bring his action scenes back to earth iron monkey is at its heart a hardcore , kung fu action film rather than any kind of drama a la crouching tiger however , there are brief moments of profoundness shared between characters , such as those that pass between our outlaw hero and his good-hearted but misguided enemy , chief fox while in no way the equal of a masterpiece like drunken master 2 , iron monkey dances quite nicely to the invading kung fu tune .
it's not a pretty death , and it's leaving the likes of schwartznager , stallone , and van damme wearing cement galoshes at the bottom of a kung fu sea .
it's not a pretty death , and it's leaving the likes of schwartznager , stallone , and van damme wearing cement galoshes at the bottom of a kung fu sea .
first troy beyer wrote the critically panned " b  the basic story follows three single friends -- jazz ( beyer ) , lena ( randi ingerman ) , and michelle ( paget brewster ) -- in their search for love  i'll give beyer one more strike , and then she's out .
 the basic story follows three single friends -- jazz ( beyer ) , lena ( randi ingerman ) , and michelle ( paget brewster ) -- in their search for love .
 the basic story follows three single friends -- jazz ( beyer ) , lena ( randi ingerman ) , and michelle ( paget brewster ) -- in their search for love .
wild things is a suspenseful thriller starring matt dillon , denise richards , and neve campbell that deals with all the issues ; sex , love , murder , and betrayal neve campbell , who most people relate to scream and scream 2 , plays blue bay outcast suzie toller .
wild things is a suspenseful thriller starring matt dillon , denise richards , and neve campbell that deals with all the issues ; sex , love , murder , and betrayal playing kelly van ryan is denise richards denise richards , still hot off the press from starship troopers , gives the most interesting performance in the entire film .
wild things is a suspenseful thriller starring matt dillon , denise richards , and neve campbell that deals with all the issues ; sex , love , murder , and betrayal matt dillon stars as sam lombardo .
kevin bacon gives one of his fair performances as ray duquette .
in the supporting cast , theresa russell plays the much oversexed sandra van ryan , daphne rubin-vega gives an unappealing performance as cop gloria perez , and bill murray shines as sam's lawyer , ken bowden .
the rest of the cast , especially nick nolte and elias koteas , are unambiguously fantastic many stories are here , from the clash between the lieutenant ( elias koteas ) and the savage colonel ( a voracious nick nolte ) to the private ( ben chaplin ) who uses his love for the woman he left behind to keep him going .
the rest of the cast , especially nick nolte and elias koteas , are unambiguously fantastic many stories are here , from the clash between the lieutenant ( elias koteas ) and the savage colonel ( a voracious nick nolte ) to the private ( ben chaplin ) who uses his love for the woman he left behind to keep him going .
many stories are here , from the clash between the lieutenant ( elias koteas ) and the savage colonel ( a voracious nick nolte ) to the private ( ben chaplin ) who uses his love for the woman he left behind to keep him going .
john travolta , whose role is nothing more than a cameo , seems not to have attacked his performance with that much verve .
george clooney , whose role became a cameo in editing , gives a strange performance .
the couple ( robin williams and nathan lane ) are about as archetypal , or as the less kind might put it ? stereotypical , gays possible williams owns a nightclub featuring drag queens where his partner performs as the featured star williams is excellent as should be no surprise .
the couple ( robin williams and nathan lane ) are about as archetypal , or as the less kind might put it ? stereotypical , gays possible the real star is lane .
 edward norton is an insomniac trying to enlighten his dull life by going to a variety of disease therapy sessions , until he meets marla ( helena bonham carter )  helena bonham carter however really had no purpose .
 norton is soon assigned to a job that calls for traveling , and it's on a plane that he meets tyler durden ( brad pitt )  i guess brad pitt was right for this role , because i felt like beating him up myself .
 that about sums up the dreadful ugliness of 102 dalmatians , a cold pea soup of cute animals , stupid home alone antics , a boring puppy love subplot between dumb humans , and glenn close reprising her best joan crawford impression  cruella de vil ( glenn close ) is released from prison due to the " cure " of her puppy homicide urges by one dr  how low have glenn close and gerard depardieu ( as the film's villain ) sunk in the film business ? it's almost laughable in a sadistic way to watch close walk around in costumes that seem to be pulled from the wardrobe of flash gordon .
 how low have glenn close and gerard depardieu ( as the film's villain ) sunk in the film business ? it's almost laughable in a sadistic way to watch close walk around in costumes that seem to be pulled from the wardrobe of flash gordon .
i must say from the outset that i have never been much of a kurt russell fan russell gives a fine performance , as do most of the cast , one that is not upstaged by the action orchestrated in the second half of the film russell plays jeff , one half of a married couple travelling with his wife amy ( kathleen quinlan ) cross country to san diego to start a new job and a new life russell , as mentioned earlier , is very good in his role , and kathleen quinlan is nowhere near as annoying as she was in apollo 13 .
russell plays jeff , one half of a married couple travelling with his wife amy ( kathleen quinlan ) cross country to san diego to start a new job and a new life russell , as mentioned earlier , is very good in his role , and kathleen quinlan is nowhere near as annoying as she was in apollo 13 .
walsh ) who offers to take them to a nearby diner to call for a tow truck walsh , as the possibly evil truck driver , is terrific ; he is one of the best of the fine batch of character actors hollywood doesn't seem to know what to do with , but director jonathan mostow is on the right track here .
this is the kind of role that could easily be turned into a flat stereotype , but john hurt , in what is certainly his best performance in a decade and possibly the most impressive of his long and distinguished career , turns " erstwhile fogy " giles into a three-dimensional human being .
just as giles is about to leave , however , he notices ronnie bostock ( jason priestley ) , and , suddenly , it's love at first sight jason priestley , cashing in on his beverly hills 90210 image , is surprisingly effective as the shallow ronnie .
 " fragile nell ( taylor ) , bisexual theo ( zeta-jones ) , and smiley luke ( wilson ) are three insomniacs who gather at the reputedly possessed hill house for an extended study on sleep disorders , hosted by professor marrow ( neeson )  as for the obscenely photogenic zeta-jones , she breezes through her scenes with a wink and a smile and takes the scenery with her .
 " fragile nell ( taylor ) , bisexual theo ( zeta-jones ) , and smiley luke ( wilson ) are three insomniacs who gather at the reputedly possessed hill house for an extended study on sleep disorders , hosted by professor marrow ( neeson ) .
 " fragile nell ( taylor ) , bisexual theo ( zeta-jones ) , and smiley luke ( wilson ) are three insomniacs who gather at the reputedly possessed hill house for an extended study on sleep disorders , hosted by professor marrow ( neeson )  taylor is thoroughly insufferable in her first big-budget lead  her character is supposed to be depressed , having tended to an unloving mother for too many years , but taylor plays nell as supernaturally lame , alternately grouchy , mopey , wiggy and pathetic , and i kept wondering why the other characters didn't just ditch this bitch .
 " fragile nell ( taylor ) , bisexual theo ( zeta-jones ) , and smiley luke ( wilson ) are three insomniacs who gather at the reputedly possessed hill house for an extended study on sleep disorders , hosted by professor marrow ( neeson )  " who on earth would say that in place of " citizen kane meets the munsters " ?  ( furthermore , would you gladly spend a single night in a house befitting that description ? ) both actresses fare better than neeson , who looks embarrassed to be a part of this ensemble ( and for good reason ) , and his character is the most bland  later , he risks his life by climbing a crumbling stairwell to save nell ( it's amusing to hear neeson shout " nell " repeatedly , given his starring role in the 1994 jodie foster vehicle of the same name ) .
 that's really about all that can be said about the " plot " because nothing much happens , except that the main character , wise-cracking jerry ( andrew ross ) , has the hots for a cute blonde ( kerry brennan ) , and there is a big contest in the climax .
 that's really about all that can be said about the " plot " because nothing much happens , except that the main character , wise-cracking jerry ( andrew ross ) , has the hots for a cute blonde ( kerry brennan ) , and there is a big contest in the climax .
 so what saves , " party camp , " from the dreaded zero star rating ? well , that's simple : jewel shepard , as a flighty bimbo , was admittedly fun to watch .
this is the last carry on film with its almost intact regular cast and it is the swansong of hattie jacques and sid james  dick turpin ( sid james ) and his gang which includes harriett/harry ( barbara windsor ) and tom " doc " scholl ( peter butterworth ) , terrorise the countryside by staging highway robberies : " stand and deliver ! " owing to the increased occurrence of turpin's robberies , captain desmond fancey of the bow street runners ( kenneth williams ) and his sidekick sergeant jock strapp ( jack douglas ) visit turpin's area of influence to bring him to justice  their intellect does not count for much and when they increasingly become suspicious of reverend flasher aka dick turpin ( sid james ) , whom they confided in earlier , they still cannot believe that the rector has any part in these robberies  then again , sir roger has assigned the dimwits fancey and jock strapp aswell as the old dithering constable ( kenneth connor ) to keep an eye on their prisoner ! there is no doubt that this is a 'sid james' carry on movie  when her girls and her are robbed by turpin , she is determined to catch him and helps the reverend to find the culprit ! a carry on by the numbers , this movie is only notable for the great performance by sid james in his last carry on movie .
 dick turpin ( sid james ) and his gang which includes harriett/harry ( barbara windsor ) and tom " doc " scholl ( peter butterworth ) , terrorise the countryside by staging highway robberies : " stand and deliver ! " owing to the increased occurrence of turpin's robberies , captain desmond fancey of the bow street runners ( kenneth williams ) and his sidekick sergeant jock strapp ( jack douglas ) visit turpin's area of influence to bring him to justice  barbara windsor is also funny as harriett the sex mad housemaid and member of the gang , and hattie jacques' small but effective role as the rector's housekeeper martha hoggett is played to perfection .
 dick turpin ( sid james ) and his gang which includes harriett/harry ( barbara windsor ) and tom " doc " scholl ( peter butterworth ) , terrorise the countryside by staging highway robberies : " stand and deliver ! " owing to the increased occurrence of turpin's robberies , captain desmond fancey of the bow street runners ( kenneth williams ) and his sidekick sergeant jock strapp ( jack douglas ) visit turpin's area of influence to bring him to justice  peter butterworth is not allowed to shine in his boring performance as tom , and bernard bresslaw's character appears only briefly in the film .
 dick turpin ( sid james ) and his gang which includes harriett/harry ( barbara windsor ) and tom " doc " scholl ( peter butterworth ) , terrorise the countryside by staging highway robberies : " stand and deliver ! " owing to the increased occurrence of turpin's robberies , captain desmond fancey of the bow street runners ( kenneth williams ) and his sidekick sergeant jock strapp ( jack douglas ) visit turpin's area of influence to bring him to justice  then again , sir roger has assigned the dimwits fancey and jock strapp aswell as the old dithering constable ( kenneth connor ) to keep an eye on their prisoner ! there is no doubt that this is a 'sid james' carry on movie  jack douglas plays a milder version of his excruciatingly annoying on-screen persona and kenneth williams is given a rather mundane part .
 dick turpin ( sid james ) and his gang which includes harriett/harry ( barbara windsor ) and tom " doc " scholl ( peter butterworth ) , terrorise the countryside by staging highway robberies : " stand and deliver ! " owing to the increased occurrence of turpin's robberies , captain desmond fancey of the bow street runners ( kenneth williams ) and his sidekick sergeant jock strapp ( jack douglas ) visit turpin's area of influence to bring him to justice  jack douglas plays a milder version of his excruciatingly annoying on-screen persona and kenneth williams is given a rather mundane part .
 when will robinson ( jack johnson ) teaches his pet robot about friendship , you are actually supposed to buy it  they're mostly right , except that johnson ( will ) wasn't a good enough actor to carry it off .
 also , gary oldman is never a bad actor , even though he is typecast as a villain  when gary oldman easily reprograms will's pet robot to kill the robinsons , my friend summed it up perfectly : " he flipped the switch to 'evil .
 william hurt isn't too bad either .
maybe it was the above-par performances by the movie's two leads ( jared leto and " cybil " actress alicia witt ) or could it be the fame-hungry local journalist ( leto ) looking for a meaty story to put on his resume ?like all movies of this nature , one of the chief pleasures is trying to guess whodunit .
so who is it this time ?the obvious candidate is the slightly off-kilter professor at the college the girl went to ( none other than freddy kruger himself , robert englund ) , who teaches a class on urban legends .
maybe it was the above-par performances by the movie's two leads ( jared leto and " cybil " actress alicia witt ) .
 " american pie " alums jason biggs and mena suvari star in this summer's attempt to capitalize on the youth market looking for a comedy about young people they can relate to that combines generic hollywood cute couple-ness and zany comedy  it's about an a+ student ( biggs as " paul " ) who gets a scholarship to some college in new york city who sticks out like a sore thumb and falls for dora ( suvari ) a ditzy heroin-chic goth chick who has no ambition or self-respect whatsoever and allows herself to be pushed around just like " hick-boy " paul is .
 " american pie " alums jason biggs and mena suvari star in this summer's attempt to capitalize on the youth market looking for a comedy about young people they can relate to that combines generic hollywood cute couple-ness and zany comedy  it's about an a+ student ( biggs as " paul " ) who gets a scholarship to some college in new york city who sticks out like a sore thumb and falls for dora ( suvari ) a ditzy heroin-chic goth chick who has no ambition or self-respect whatsoever and allows herself to be pushed around just like " hick-boy " paul is .
despite the presence of pierce brosnan , there is nary a hint of james bond flash here .
searching for a way to get information on the government , osnard sets his sights on harry pendel ( geoffrey rush ) , an unctuous tailor serving the panamanian elite geoffrey rush is wonderful as harry , fawning over his customers by day and savoring his rich family life in the evenings , all while playing secret agent in the off hours with his new benefactor .
before long , he is forced to spy on his loving wife , louisa ( jamie lee curtis ) , an aide to the canal director although she gets far too little screen time , jamie lee curtis imbues louisa with a depth greater than the screenplay provides her .
harold pinter is amusing as harry's uncle benny , who pops up throughout the story in a number of creative ways .
but the most important secondary performers are leonor varela and brendan gleeson , both outstanding as two wounded activists .
 sid ( donald sutherland ) , believe in a more organic approach .
 gray edwards ( alec baldwin ) heads the task force that consists of a wise guy ( buscemi ) , a tough woman ( peri gilpin ) and a gentle giant ( ving rhames ) .
 gray edwards ( alec baldwin ) heads the task force that consists of a wise guy ( buscemi ) , a tough woman ( peri gilpin ) and a gentle giant ( ving rhames ) .
 most of our planet is devastated , with humans living in a few protected cities  gray edwards ( alec baldwin ) heads the task force that consists of a wise guy ( buscemi ) , a tough woman ( peri gilpin ) and a gentle giant ( ving rhames ) .
 throwing a monkey wrench into the plans is the requisite dumb ass : in this case general hein ( james woods ) , who wants to use the zeus cannon to bomb the aliens back to the stone age , even if it destroys earth as well .
sean connery stars as a harvard law professor who heads back into the courtroom , by way of the everglades , to defend a young , educated black man ( blair underwood ) .
sean connery stars as a harvard law professor who heads back into the courtroom , by way of the everglades , to defend a young , educated black man ( blair underwood ) .
 the guy is on death row for the murder of a white girl , and says that his confession was coerced from the region's tough , black cop ( lawrence fishburne ) .
enter a working class smart-alecky new armored car driver named tom ( christian slater ) .
he is befriended and aided by a spunky churchgoing young woman from town named karen ( minnie driver ) .
nicholson plays melvin udall , probably the most horrible person ever on the screen naturally , udall , conelly and gay neighbor simon bishop ( kinnear ) who nicholson hates , all hit it off in the end nicholson is hilarious as melvin , churning out insults with superb relish only nicholson could get away with the lines that melvin delivers hunt is also good as waitress carol , and easily rises to the challenge of nicholson in fact , the scene stealer is simon's dog , who is funnier than nicholson but this is primarily nicholsons film , and every scene he's in , he's steals it the movie is a bit overlong , but nicholson is such good fun that the running time passes by pretty quickly overall , as good as it gets is a fun movie , even though it may be unbelivable , and certainly worth seeing ( if just for jack nicholsons performance .
 vsitcom star hunt , who was last seen in twister , 1996 ) like good will hunting ( 1997 ) and titanic ( 1997 ) , even though the outcome is completely obvious , as good as it gets is an enjoyable , funny and warm comedy hunt is also good as waitress carol , and easily rises to the challenge of nicholson .
naturally , udall , conelly and gay neighbor simon bishop ( kinnear ) who nicholson hates , all hit it off in the end kinnear , as the gay neighbor , seems to have a slightly underwritten role , he's more of a plot convience than a character .
providing solid support is cuba gooding , jnr ( jerry maguire , 1996 ) and yeardly smith ( who is the voice of lisa simpsons in the simpsons ) although gooding isn't as good as is character in maguire , he is still fun .
providing solid support is cuba gooding , jnr ( jerry maguire , 1996 ) and yeardly smith ( who is the voice of lisa simpsons in the simpsons ) although gooding isn't as good as is character in maguire , he is still fun smith is also good , although she has a fairly small role .
sigourney weaver is back as ripley and provides another excellent performance of this character .
notably , charles dance as the doctor with whom ripley finds momentary escape from fury 109 .
in fact , the shakespearean relationship between moses ( val kilmer ) and the pharaoh rameses ( ralph fiennes ) makes the story more interesting if anything .
in fact , the shakespearean relationship between moses ( val kilmer ) and the pharaoh rameses ( ralph fiennes ) makes the story more interesting if anything .
moses , a hebrew , is saved from the slaughter of the firstborn sons by his mother when she sets him in a basket on the nile ; he floats into the pharaoh seti ( patrick stewart ) 's palace and is taken in by the royal family .
the cast of voices is most impressive , and also includes such noteables as sandra bullock , jeff goldblum , danny glover , and steve martin .
the cast of voices is most impressive , and also includes such noteables as sandra bullock , jeff goldblum , danny glover , and steve martin .
jack nicholson has a funny way of playing characters with very few redeeming qualities , but whom you end up liking anyway good performances are turned in by all principal players in this film , especially by nicholson and hunt .
you can tell that this is his favorite place to be a vicious nuisance , when his waitress carol ( helen hunt ) tells him he can just go sit in another section , and all the other waitresses just cringe good performances are turned in by all principal players in this film , especially by nicholson and hunt .
another person who often crosses melvin's sights is simon ( greg kinnear ) , an artist who lives on melvin's floor greg kinnear , who is becoming known for his supporting film roles , is also very good at playing the vulnerable simon  performs with a hyped-up level of energy which contrasts nicely with that of kinnear , and comes through with a near constant comic performance .
simon's friend frank ( cuba gooding , jr cuba gooding jr the one noticeable area where the film is lacking , however , is the absence of cuba gooding , jr .
 it's got a head start in this movie starring jamie lee curtis and another baldwin brother ( william this time ) in a story regarding a crew of a tugboat that comes across a deserted russian tech ship that has a strangeness to it when they kick the power back on .
 we don't know why the crew was really out in the middle of nowhere , we don't know the origin of what took over the ship ( just that a big pink flashy thing hit the mir ) , and , of course , we don't know why donald sutherland is stumbling around drunkenly throughout .
i'm really starting to wonder about alicia silverstone  hideaway was a horrific novel adaptation alicia had only a minor role in  the preview looked good and of course i'm crazymadinlove with alicia , but the movie was a bunch of bad jokes coming from whiny , unlikable characters  so last night i walked into the video store and saw alicia's pretty face on the cover of some made-for-video thriller called the babysitter  what i got was 90 minutes of regret--the worst alicia silverstone movie ever  where to begin in criticizing this movie ? the plot is a thin shred that moves slower than a glacier , the writing could have been done ( and for all we know it was ) by a ten year old , alicia is the star and she's still wasted in a movie that has no appeal whatsoever  so why does this movie get one star out of me ? well , alicia spends twenty minutes of the movie in the bathtub  alicia plays a babysitter who's spending friday night looking after two kids whose parents are out getting drunk at a cocktail party  and of course anyone as beautiful as alicia automatically spends their friday nights at home ( at least that movie critic at large guy does )  the drunken father thinks she's just the thing to recapture his lost youth , her boyfriend lets his imagination run wild while spying on alicia from outside , even the prepubescent boy looks in on alicia through the bathroom keyhole while she's taking her bubble bath .
 the acting is mostly mediocre , not including the fantastic jon voight  cultivating his usual sliminess , voight gives an unexpectedly standout performance as west canaan coyotes head coach bud kilmer .
 unfortunately , when his star quarterback , lance harbor ( paul walker ) , goes down for the count , he's got to rely on the unreliable abilities of backup john moxon ( james van der beek ) .
 unfortunately , when his star quarterback , lance harbor ( paul walker ) , goes down for the count , he's got to rely on the unreliable abilities of backup john moxon ( james van der beek )  this focus is further emphasized by the casting : james van der beek , of tv's " dawson's creek , " is an understandable choice for the reluctant hero , although he never manages to do anything with the role .
 moxon leads the team through its last four games , and then must cope with his newfound stardom , the effect it has on his relationship with girlfriend julie ( amy smart ) , and other temptations that abound in football-crazy west canaan .
 john patterson ( val kilmer ) , the bridge building expert set to oversee the operation , tried to rid his operation of the lions , but fails  kilmer is a bridge builder and that's all we see him as .
 a world renound hunter , remington ( michael douglas ) , is called in and the battle , man against lion , begins .
visiting florence to follow up several leads , she is lured by the killer alfredo ( thomas kretschmann ) to an art gallery , a favourite haunt where he hopes to identify exactly who is on his tail thomas kretschmann is chillingly effective as alfredo , and marco leonardi ( of cinema paradiso , and possibly the most gorgeous looking man in italy ) does okay as anna's work colleague and increasingly confused love interest .
grim stuff , to be sure , but the subject of a remarkable film from italy's master of the horror thriller dario argento boasting an unforgettable soundtrack from the grandfather of film music ennio morricone , the stendhal syndrome is a quite magnificent return to form for argento based on the novel by graziella magherini , the film stars argento's daughter asia as young roman police inspector anna manni in pursuit of a brutal rapist-killer a gripping story evolves , and a coherent one , too , which may surprise those familiar with argento's often lumpy narratives argento is once again working in his native italy , and he fully exploits the opportunities to use art and architecture for both symbolic statements and as departure points for several brilliant hallucinogenic sequences proof that , at his most inspired , argento remains one of the world's most exhilarating filmmakers asia argento's performance is by turns risky , awkward and fascinating it's been three decades since argento and morricone worked together but by the closing scenes , the stendhal syndrome has already offered us enough to qualify as one of the very best films of dario argento's career .
thomas kretschmann is chillingly effective as alfredo , and marco leonardi ( of cinema paradiso , and possibly the most gorgeous looking man in italy ) does okay as anna's work colleague and increasingly confused love interest .
not with john goodman , he didn't do much of anything , but with the brilliant actor joe morton , who can really sing .
the fourth blues brother is j evan bonifant , who's ten .
the good trailer had hinted that they pulled the impossible off , but making a blues brothers movie without jake blues ( john belushi ) is such a dumb idea i really had no hope not with john goodman , he didn't do much of anything , but with the brilliant actor joe morton , who can really sing i'm quite pleased that there were less car pile-ups , because they meant less music , and john landis seems to have lost interest in the whole thing the music is all as good as ever , tons of great musicians showing up -- with the exception of johnny lang , who can't sing , all the musicians do a great job .
 firstly , morgan freeman , possibly the greatest actor alive ( after such films as driving miss daisy , the shawshank redemption and se7en ) , was cast as a shifty goon intent on stealing enough money for a healthy retirement  jim ( morgan freeman ) and a small gang of thieves locate the van and attempt to steal the three million dollars  not at one stage capturing what could have been a fabulous on screen battle between slater and freeman , we are left to reminisce on films that dared to do something different and achieved more than what was expected  we can forgive morgan freeman for giving a slightly disappointing performance since he is newish to the action genre , but christian slater could have achieved so much more had the amount of crummy one liners been reduced and some personality added to his character .
 the local sheriff ( randy quaid , whom most will remember as the drunken pilot in id4 ) and a couple of police men investigate the situation , but their morals are soon overpowered by greediness as each character contemplates what he/she would do with their share of the three million dollars .
 but nether the less , armored guard couriers tom ( christian slater ) and his uncle are carrying three million dollars in the back of their van  not at one stage capturing what could have been a fabulous on screen battle between slater and freeman , we are left to reminisce on films that dared to do something different and achieved more than what was expected  such titles as broken arrow ( slater and john travolta ) and face/off ( nicholas cage and john travolta ) come to mind as films that have mastered silver screen confrontations  we can forgive morgan freeman for giving a slightly disappointing performance since he is newish to the action genre , but christian slater could have achieved so much more had the amount of crummy one liners been reduced and some personality added to his character  if you had asked me whether slater could perform well enough to substantially boost a movie prior to the release of broken arrow , my answer would have been a definite no .
 the characters are hawk ( edward furlong ) , lex ( giuseppe andrews ) , trip ( james debello ) , and jam ( sam huntington )  edward furlong has done far better work than this , and so has natasha lyonne , and so has lin shaye , but hey , they've got to make a living in hollywood .
 the characters are hawk ( edward furlong ) , lex ( giuseppe andrews ) , trip ( james debello ) , and jam ( sam huntington ) .
 the characters are hawk ( edward furlong ) , lex ( giuseppe andrews ) , trip ( james debello ) , and jam ( sam huntington ) .
 just what did he expect out of a dumb teenage rock n' roll movie like this ? " i'm wondering the same thing  the characters are hawk ( edward furlong ) , lex ( giuseppe andrews ) , trip ( james debello ) , and jam ( sam huntington ) .
 oh , and jam ( real name jeremiah ) has a really , really annoying ultra-religious mother who ought to be reported to the child welfare agency .
penny henderson ( mary stuart masterson ) , the station owner's secretary , must deal with her overbearing boss , an unimpressed sponsor and writers ready to quite on a moment's notice , partly due to the fact that they haven't been paid in weeks mary stuart masterson does well in her role as penny ( i'm trying to be unbiased so i won't tell you how amazing she looked ) , although brian benben gets most of the screen time .
among the mayhem , she must also deal with her soon-to-be ex-husband , roger ( brian benben ) who desperately wants her back mary stuart masterson does well in her role as penny ( i'm trying to be unbiased so i won't tell you how amazing she looked ) , although brian benben gets most of the screen time .
along with the two leads , are several recognizable faces , including corbin bernsen ( l .
law ) , michael mckean ( laverne & shirley ) and bobcat goldthwait .
nicolas cage comes up with an ingenious survival mechanism for his role in the wink-and-a-concussive-nudge bombast-o-rama con air  the opening credits sequence introduces us to cage as cameron poe , a gulf war veteran convicted of manslaughter and serving eight years in prison after an ill-fated bar-room brawl  cage appears to realize that con air is going to be utterly dim-witted and ridiculous , and that he's going to have to do something to keep himself entertained  and thus he slips into a familiar , surreal role as his own commentary on the proceedings -- cage plays cameron poe as a buffed-up version of raising arizona's h  cage should have known what he was getting himself into  the critical difference between the rock and con air is cage's performance  in the rock , cage appeared to be having the time of his life jumping into the action fray for the first time  while the plot of con air finds poe a parolee on board a hijacked prison transport plane whose goal is just to get home , cage's goal is different but just as simple : to get out of the film with some measure of dignity intact  it is that kind of exhausting excess to which cage is responding with his detached performance  marshal ) goes for earnest , cage looks like he just wants to go to sleep  it doesn't bode well for cage's appearance in face/off later this month ; perhaps he already realizes that all he can do in action films is more of the same over and over  there's a word for people like you , nicolas .
 at a desert stop for the plane-load of convicts , serial killer garland greene ( steve buscemi ) wanders of into a trailer park where he meets a little girl having a tea party in a drained swimming pool  their tete-a-tete is eerie and menacing , providing a welcome shift in tone and giving buscemi a chance to stand out in a cast with too many villains ( danny trejo , ving rhames and a characteristically reptilian john malkovich among them ) .
 their tete-a-tete is eerie and menacing , providing a welcome shift in tone and giving buscemi a chance to stand out in a cast with too many villains ( danny trejo , ving rhames and a characteristically reptilian john malkovich among them ) .
 their tete-a-tete is eerie and menacing , providing a welcome shift in tone and giving buscemi a chance to stand out in a cast with too many villains ( danny trejo , ving rhames and a characteristically reptilian john malkovich among them )  while malkovich goes for the outrageous and john cusack ( as a u .
 their tete-a-tete is eerie and menacing , providing a welcome shift in tone and giving buscemi a chance to stand out in a cast with too many villains ( danny trejo , ving rhames and a characteristically reptilian john malkovich among them )  while malkovich goes for the outrageous and john cusack ( as a u .
a serial killer ( elias koteas ) has been on the loose in philadephia , but detective john hobbes ( denzel washington ) , the noblest man on the police force , has brought him to justice of the several dozen actors to play azazel , the best is by far elias koteas ( exotica , crash ) , who , despite only being on screen for about ten minutes , gives a fantastically charged performance .
a serial killer ( elias koteas ) has been on the loose in philadephia , but detective john hobbes ( denzel washington ) , the noblest man on the police force , has brought him to justice everyone else , including denzel washington , is boring washington's flat performance is the most disappointing surprise of the film washington's subdued approach is part of the reason for this ; i never felt a sense of urgency however , at least washington was believable , which is more than can be said for embeth davidtz ( schindler's list ) and donald sutherland although the plot proceeds with a convoluted , game-like structure , it uses a denzel washington-supplied voiceover to overexplain matters .
only hobbes and a pretty , female theology teacher ( embeth davidtz ) have an inkling of what they're up against however , at least washington was believable , which is more than can be said for embeth davidtz ( schindler's list ) and donald sutherland that said , however , there's nothing inspired about either davidtz's or sutherland's work .
a serial killer ( elias koteas ) has been on the loose in philadephia , but detective john hobbes ( denzel washington ) , the noblest man on the police force , has brought him to justice the rest of the cops , including hobbes' partner , jonesy ( john goodman ) ; lou ( james gandolfini ) , a newcomer to the department ; and lieutenant stanton ( donald sutherland ) , don't have a clue , and , as a result , they are in mortal danger john goodman also seems to be enjoying himself , although his role for most of the film is relegated to that of a burly sidekick .
the rest of the cops , including hobbes' partner , jonesy ( john goodman ) ; lou ( james gandolfini ) , a newcomer to the department ; and lieutenant stanton ( donald sutherland ) , don't have a clue , and , as a result , they are in mortal danger .
no film in recent has left me with such conflicted feelings as neil jordan's harrowing , humorous , horrifying adaptation of patrick mccabe's novel about young lad francie brady's ( eamonn owens ) descent into madness in 1960s ireland anchoring the whole film is the astonishing debut performance of owens ; love francie or hate him , you cannot take your eyes off of owens .
on another hand , i found it difficult to laugh at some of francie's darkly comic shenanigans because he obviously is such a sick , needy child , having been raised by a drunken father ( stephen rea ) and a suicidal mother ( aisling o'sullivan ) what makes it so unsettling is the francie's overall wink-wink yet matter-of-fact attitude about everything , expressed in a cheeky voiceover narration delivered by the adult francie ( rea again ) think heavenly creatures played largely for laughs , and you'll sort of understand in the lobby after the screening , i overheard one man raving about how great yet disturbing it was ; i also heard one particularly offended woman say with disgust , " that movie was so unfunny ! " " i didn't know what to expect it's like something you chase for so long , but then you don't know how to react when you get it i still don't know how to react .
 nugent ( fiona shaw ) .
on another hand , i found it difficult to laugh at some of francie's darkly comic shenanigans because he obviously is such a sick , needy child , having been raised by a drunken father ( stephen rea ) and a suicidal mother ( aisling o'sullivan ) .
the movie is based on the true story of homer hickam ( jake gyllenhaal ) , a teenager in the 1950's company town of coalwood , west virginia .
the mine , which is run by homer's father ( chris cooper ) , is not the place for homer , however chris cooper ( the horse whisperer ) , as homer's father , is less likeable -- even downright despicable at times -- but his turn here gives gravity to the movie .
with the help of their history teacher , miss riley ( laura dern ) , and several mine workers , the four are soon bound for great things laura dern ( jurassic park ) lends a strong performance in the role of the history teacher , giving the boys the support and guidance they need .
following one dead end lead after another , each funnier than the previous , they eventually end up in new mexico with his real biological parents : alan alda and lily tomlin a grand cast ( tomlin , alda , moore , ben stiller , patricia arquette , tea leoni , george segal ) interacts in a seamless parade of laughs .
following one dead end lead after another , each funnier than the previous , they eventually end up in new mexico with his real biological parents : alan alda and lily tomlin a grand cast ( tomlin , alda , moore , ben stiller , patricia arquette , tea leoni , george segal ) interacts in a seamless parade of laughs .
>from the commercials , this looks like a mild-mannered neil simonesque tale with mary tyler moore baring her bra touted as the highlight a grand cast ( tomlin , alda , moore , ben stiller , patricia arquette , tea leoni , george segal ) interacts in a seamless parade of laughs .
a grand cast ( tomlin , alda , moore , ben stiller , patricia arquette , tea leoni , george segal ) interacts in a seamless parade of laughs .
a grand cast ( tomlin , alda , moore , ben stiller , patricia arquette , tea leoni , george segal ) interacts in a seamless parade of laughs .
 catherine zeta-jones plays virginia baker , an insurance investigator tracking down an infamous art thief named robert macdougal ( sean connery ) .
 ving rhames also makes an appearance in this movie , and though he has great screen presence ( although so do connery and zeta-jones ) and the most interesting character in the film , not even he can rescue this film from the depths of the boring film abyss ( a concept i invented just to describe this picture ) .
the performances in the film are all top notch , with fine turns by takeshi kaneshiro as ma wing jing and jessica hester and valerie chow an early fight between takeshi kaneshiro and yuen biao on the back of a horse is to be seen to be believed .
wing jing meets the singer at the club ( jessica hester ) and falls in love with her , not realizing that she is the star attraction jessica , having waited outside in the cold with her manager all night , gives up and returns home the performances in the film are all top notch , with fine turns by takeshi kaneshiro as ma wing jing and jessica hester and valerie chow .
corey yuen's latest film , " hero " is notable on two fronts secondly , the film is the re-discovery of yuen biao the comic turn by yuen wah , previously known as the mad vietnamese in samo hung's " eastern condors " , is a marvelous surprise the stand-out is by yuen biao who returns to the screen after a string of disappointments , with a stellar performance but when the time comes to fight , yuen biao has never looked better corey yuen directs the film with a maturity and a sense of pacing that has been lacking in hong kong movies as of late an early fight between takeshi kaneshiro and yuen biao on the back of a horse is to be seen to be believed .
dead-bang , an action thriller starring don johnson , lives up to its dumb title , or at least to half of it  " in the film , johnson plays  the role must have been really challenging for johnson since his character , jerry beck , is a gritty los angeles homicide detective , a real stretch from the slick vice detective johnson portrayed on " miami vice  dead-bang tries to don a mask of social relevance by incorporating themes of racism and white supremacy , but its efforts are nothing more than token gestures and nothing less than insulting  the only real virtue of dead-bang , believe it or not , is don johnson , who tries to overcome the limitations of the movie's pitiful script  johnson succeeds in giving his character a sarcastic sense of humor and a hint of depth , and his pessimistic wisecracks occasionally bring the film to life  the funniest scene has johnson throwing-up all over a criminal as he interrogates him .
 the role must have been really challenging for johnson since his character , jerry beck , is a gritty los angeles homicide detective , a real stretch from the slick vice detective johnson portrayed on " miami vice  " a la mel gibson in lethal weapon , beck is an emotional wreck , complete with violent outbursts , unscrupulous police methods , and a bleak outlook on life  beck's wife has just divorced him , and she is cutting him off from their children  but beck's family and emotional problems take a back seat to the action and thrills in dead-bang  beck is investigating the brutal murders of a shopkeeper and a cop  the movie depicts beck's investigation so clumsily that you never see the connections between his clues and his conclusions  according to the movie's production notes , dead-bang is based on the real-life experiences of still-active detective jerry beck  william forsythe , for example , is painfully bad as arthur kressler , a wholesome by-the-book fbi agent who's offended by beck's foul language and unorthodox methods  dead-bang marks the motion picture debut of tim reid ( " wkrp in cincinnati " and " frank's place " ) , but his talents are completely wasted in a cliched and contrived role ; he plays the chief officer of a squadron of black cops who help beck to nail the villains  the other amusing scene involves a psychological examination of beck , in which he can't keep a straight face because the psychiatrist resembles woody allen .
dead-bang , an action thriller starring don johnson , lives up to its dumb title , or at least to half of it  " in the film , johnson plays  the role must have been really challenging for johnson since his character , jerry beck , is a gritty los angeles homicide detective , a real stretch from the slick vice detective johnson portrayed on " miami vice  i certainly expected more from long-time director john frankenheimer who directed the classic political thriller , the manchurian candidate--as well as black sunday , seven days in may , and the french connection ii  in all fairness to frankenheimer , however , i should note that most of dead-bang's shortcomings seem to stem from its shabby script rather than from the direction  the only real virtue of dead-bang , believe it or not , is don johnson , who tries to overcome the limitations of the movie's pitiful script  johnson succeeds in giving his character a sarcastic sense of humor and a hint of depth , and his pessimistic wisecracks occasionally bring the film to life  the funniest scene has johnson throwing-up all over a criminal as he interrogates him .
 in all fairness to frankenheimer , however , i should note that most of dead-bang's shortcomings seem to stem from its shabby script rather than from the direction .
 i certainly expected more from long-time director john frankenheimer who directed the classic political thriller , the manchurian candidate--as well as black sunday , seven days in may , and the french connection ii .
after glimpsing a melancholy beauty looking out from a dance studio window while on the train home from work , sugiyana ( koji yakusho ) decides after some trepidation to take up ballroom dance lessons in order to meet the woman who has stirred something in himself .
after finding the weekly fees for private lessons from the elegant and beautiful mai ( tamiyo kusakari ) too rich for his blood , sugiyama opts for groups lessons simply to be near her .
later on , we meet aoki at the dance studio ( naoto takenaka ) , a co-worker and all out weirdo and one of the laugh riot highlights of the film .
 on a parallel track , government scientists have cloned a version of sil from the first film ( now called eve , again " played " by natasha henstridge ) and are keeping her around for some testing  eve's bio-rhythms go off the scale each time one of her kinfolk " mates , " which we are forced to witness in gross-out detail , but otherwise there doesn't appear to be a whole lot of reason why henstridge is in this film , unless it was written into her contract ( let's hope it cited one sequel and one sequel only ) .
 peter boyle is totally wasted as an institutionalized scientist who screams " i told 'em not to go ! " at the top of his lungs , referring to the mars mission but more likely aimed at the makers of this piffle  what's a talented filmmaker like peter medak ( " the ruling class , " " the krays , " " let him have it " ) doing directing this tripe , i wonder  " last year peter hyams gave us " the relic " ; no thanks necessary there .
 michael madsen reprises his role of press lennox ( so that he can enter high security areas , flash a badge and claim to be press , maybe ? ) , as does marg helgenberger as dr .
 michael madsen reprises his role of press lennox ( so that he can enter high security areas , flash a badge and claim to be press , maybe ? ) , as does marg helgenberger as dr .
my reasons for this are simple : 1 ) adam sandler is great sandler plays robby hart , a wedding singer who once had dreams of being in a rock band and writing his own music naturally , the true star here is sandler whereas his roles in his previous films kind of had sandler playing sandler , the wedding singer gives him a character that , for the first time , he actually has to fit into .
2 ) drew barrymore is great with his life in complete disarray , he meets julia ( barrymore ) , a waitress barrymore is simply adorable here ( i've never seen her look so close to the way she did in et ) .
in the opening scenes , he seems like a happy-go-lucky wedding singer , at least partially enjoying his profession and doing a rather good job of talking down a really drunk individual ( steve buscemi ) who decides that his brother's wedding is a good place to tell the whole world that his life , up to that point , was utter pointlessness .
a week later , at his own wedding , he is left standing at the altar by his ex-fianc ? e , linda ( angela featherstone ) .
she is engaged to glenn ( matthew glave ) , and is to marry him in about three months .
the man in question is wade whitehouse ( nick nolte ) .
his demeanor also puts his relationship with a local townsgirl ( sissy spacek ) at risk .
what kind of force can move a man to the edge of his emotions and beyond the reach of people who genuinely care for him ?we learn that the answer is his father ( james coburn ) .
take the ruggedly handsome victor plaza ( liberto rabal ) , for instance .
when we first meet elena ( francesca neri ) , the woman in the middle of the nervous shakedown , she looks like spice girl barbie with her frizzy shock of orange hair , but later tones down her look sufficiently to pass for juliette lewis .
elena's husband david ( javier bardem ) is the cop crippled in the shooting and he wears david schwimmer's bemused expression throughout .
the animation tends to suffer from some slackness in the early going and the humorous element , a madcap dragon wannabe ( in the guise of a loquacious lizard with a case of dry mouth , courtesy eddie murphy's animated vocal talents ) , plays like an inappropriate if necessary ( formula-wise ) afterthought .
 billy crystal plays sam cayman , an agent who , at the beginning of the film , is in romania  crystal is always entertaining , and he has a few good lines here ( some of which are subtle throwaways that many will miss entirely ) ; often , however , he's countered by a slew of jokes that aren't funny , and cause an involuntary rolling of the eyes .
 his name is max ( gheorghe muresan ) , and sam thinks he'd be a great movie star because of his size  muresan is kind of fun to watch , but he just can't act very well .
 subplots are as follows : sam has a son and a wife ( kathleen quinlan ) , and he's never around for them , so they move to chicago  quinlan , on the other hand , is a great actress who needs to get a role that shows off her talents .
 it has its moments , the best of which features steven seagal making fun of himself  in one great scene , sam gets his son on the phone to talk to seagal ; of course , his son doesn't believe that he's actually speaking to seagal , and he goes off about how bad of an actor he is ( i would quote the line i like but it would probably lose its effect ) .
 on the team with him are beth halperin ( sharon stone ) , a biochemist who was once his student and lover ; harry adams ( samuel l  jackson ) , a mathematician who earned his first doctorate at the age of 18 ; ted fielding ( liev schreiber ) , an astrophysicist who is awed by the opportunity to explore alien technology ; and harold barnes ( peter coyote ) , the government operative in charge of the mission  what about that a-list cast ? not surprisingly , the most energetic performance is given by samuel l  jackson , but his harry isn't a person ; he's a walking plot device spouting occasionally-witty dialogue .
 with expectations high ( and how could they not be , considering that another barry levinson/dustin hoffman collaboration , the excellent wag the dog , is still playing in theaters ? ) , something this bad can't help but look even worse  we're introduced to norman goodman ( dustin hoffman ) , a psychologist who once wrote a $35 , 000 report for the government about what to do in the event that a crashed space ship is discovered  dustin hoffman isn't lively or particularly good -- it's ironic that this , which may be his worst work in a decade , has arrived in theaters on the heels of his best actor nomination ( for wag the dog )  i like to think that levinson and hoffman , recognizing how uninspired this movie was likely to be , chose to make wag the dog as a sort of penance ( the low-budget picture was filmed during sphere's lengthy pre-production phase ) .
 on the team with him are beth halperin ( sharon stone ) , a biochemist who was once his student and lover ; harry adams ( samuel l  sharon stone and peter coyote are both flat .
 jackson ) , a mathematician who earned his first doctorate at the age of 18 ; ted fielding ( liev schreiber ) , an astrophysicist who is awed by the opportunity to explore alien technology ; and harold barnes ( peter coyote ) , the government operative in charge of the mission  sharon stone and peter coyote are both flat .
 then there's queen latifa , who , despite getting fifth billing in the credits ( ahead of liev schreiber , who boasts at least quadruple her screen time ) , has less than a handful of lines and almost nothing to do other than inflate the body count .
gord brody ( tom green ) is an aspiring animator approaching thirty who still lives in parents jim ( rip torn ) and julie's ( julie hagerty , " airplane " ) basement  " tom green cowrites ( with " tom green show " scribe derek harvie ) , directs and stars in what is essentially tom green's primal scream  so , if tom green screams in an empty theater , does he make a sound ? it's clear that " freddy got fingered " is at least partially autobiographical and green sure has one hell of a complex about his dad ( mom gets off easier when sonny boy advises her to go out and have sex with basketball players and greeks )  while this may be of interest to his hard core fans , there's little about green's mania on display here to recommend this movie to anyone else  the film starts promisingly enough , with a well executed skateboarding scene through a shopping mall set to the sex pistols' 'problem' ( green's put together a first rate soundtrack ) and yes , i laughed a few times  green's flummoxing of a security guard with psychotic ramblings and his attempt to draw , make music and eat at the same time ( the 'daddy would you like some sausages' scene repeatedly shown in the film's trailer ) are inspired comedy  younger ( by three years ) brother freddy's internment at the institute for sexually abused children does nothing but confirm one's worst fears regarding the film's title and green's infamous 'handling' of a real horse , while not nearly as shocking as it would seem , doesn't make sense  while " freddy got fingered " has the admirable end result of depicting the harm in demeaning a child's self esteem , it's essentially a whole lot of tom green running around being noisy .
gord brody ( tom green ) is an aspiring animator approaching thirty who still lives in parents jim ( rip torn ) and julie's ( julie hagerty , " airplane " ) basement  rip torn , what were you thinking ? .
gord brody ( tom green ) is an aspiring animator approaching thirty who still lives in parents jim ( rip torn ) and julie's ( julie hagerty , " airplane " ) basement .
the first act opens with police chief martin brody ( roy scheider ) , a new york cop who has taken an easy , peaceful job running the police station on amity island , a fictitious new england resort town where there hasn't been a murder or a gun fired in 25 years scheider , dreyfuss , and shaw were known actors at the time " jaws " was made , but none of them had the draw of a robert redford or paul newman scheider hits just the right notes as a sympathetic husband and father caught in the political quagmire of doing what's right and going against the entire town .
brody is joined by matt hooper ( richard dreyfuss ) , a young , ambitious shark expert from the marine institute .
the island is shaken up by several vicious great white shark attacks right before the fourth of july , and the mayor , larry vaughn ( murray hamilton ) , doesn't want to shut down the beaches because the island is reliant on summer tourist money .
when vaughn finally relents , hooper and brody join a crusty old shark killer named quint ( robert shaw ) on his decrepit boat , the orca , to search for the shark however , most outstanding is the gnarled performance by robert shaw as the movie's captain ahab , a performance sorely overlooked by the academy awards .
films adapted from comic books have had plenty of success , whether they're about superheroes ( batman , superman , spawn ) , or geared toward kids ( casper ) or the arthouse crowd ( ghost world ) , but there's never really been a comic book like from hell before .
films adapted from comic books have had plenty of success , whether they're about superheroes ( batman , superman , spawn ) , or geared toward kids ( casper ) or the arthouse crowd ( ghost world ) , but there's never really been a comic book like from hell before .
films adapted from comic books have had plenty of success , whether they're about superheroes ( batman , superman , spawn ) , or geared toward kids ( casper ) or the arthouse crowd ( ghost world ) , but there's never really been a comic book like from hell before .
films adapted from comic books have had plenty of success , whether they're about superheroes ( batman , superman , spawn ) , or geared toward kids ( casper ) or the arthouse crowd ( ghost world ) , but there's never really been a comic book like from hell before .
for starters , it was created by alan moore ( and eddie campbell ) , who brought the medium to a whole new level in the mid '80s with a 12-part series called the watchmen to say moore and campbell thoroughly researched the subject of jack the ripper would be like saying michael jackson is starting to look a little odd i don't think anyone needs to be briefed on jack the ripper , so i won't go into the particulars here , other than to say moore and campbell have a unique and interesting theory about both the identity of the killer and the reasons he chooses to slay .
 one of their classmates , carl jenkins ( " doogie houser's " neil patrick harris , ) snags a job in military intelligence because of his strong psychic abilities .
 michael ironside plays their teacher , who waves around a cheesy fake severed arm while lecturing about civic responsibilities .
the seasons have changed since an ex-patient shot jaded child psychologist malcolm crowe ( willis ) in the comfort of his own bedroom that's right : willis , for the first time in years , gives up the spotlight to his costar willis convinces us that he's a doctor , something he was unable to do as a horndog shrink in the overheated color of night .
he will instead pursue the supernatural angle , becoming a kind of surrogate father to cole ( who lives with his single mother , lynn ( collette ) ) in the process .
desperate to get his career back on track , even at the expense of his crumbling marriage ( to williams , of rushmore ) , malcolm councils the deeply troubled cole ( osment ) osment is phenomenal , a true professional who resists mugging for the camera like some child stars with too much experience in television commercials do .
 it stars sean connery , who can still carry an action film despite his age , catherine zeta-jones , a likeable enough film presence , and ving rhames , ultra-cool star of pulp fiction and mission : impossible  sean connery is given such mind-numbing lines as " never trust a naked woman  entrapment does the same under the thin disguise of plot development ( sean connery supposedly falls in love with the girl while watching her , in tights , arc and pivot around laser beams ) .
 it stars sean connery , who can still carry an action film despite his age , catherine zeta-jones , a likeable enough film presence , and ving rhames , ultra-cool star of pulp fiction and mission : impossible  the camera zooms in frequently and leeringly at catherine zeta-jones's tight wardrobe .
synopsis : an aging master art thief , his supplier , and a young , buxom security consultant are all not who they first appear to be ( or are they ? ) in this convoluted mess involving a risky heist during the millennium  it stars sean connery , who can still carry an action film despite his age , catherine zeta-jones , a likeable enough film presence , and ving rhames , ultra-cool star of pulp fiction and mission : impossible  " ving rhames' character seems like an afterthought ; he's not developed at all .
by now you must be aware of the premise : unbeknownst to him , truman ( carrey ) is the star of his own tv series , a 24-7 peep-show in which he is surrounded by actors and placed in loosely scripted situations ; people around the world tune in for the voyeuristic thrill of his genuine reactions to fictitious stimulants the surrealistic soap opera is completely plausible thanks to a tight screenplay and a sympathetic carrey-he really is an everyman here , abandoning his facial contortions in favour of a credible , wide-eyed bewilderment .
`seahaven' , his hometown , and the show itself , are the brainchild of christof ( harris ) , who presides over his creation in the base of a fake moon , directing over 500 cameras and hundreds of actors and extras .
if the film has any flaws , one may find them in laura linney's characterization as meryl , truman's " wife " ( i doubt that betty crocker impersonation would fool anyone ) , and in a subplot involving truman's `father' , which feels curiously incomplete .
for 30 years , truman suspects nothing-`we accept the reality we're given , ' poses christof-but a desire to break free of the sunny town and visit a long lost love in `fiji' ( mcelhone , who was actually an actress fired by christof for trying to break the confidentiality agreement ) overwhelms him .
what are we going to do with jim carrey ? viewers of television's " in living color " know this one-man cartoon from such characters as fire marshall bill  viewers also know that " in living color " is a skit-show and that a little of jim carrey goes a long way  unfortunately , this fact was forgotten by the makers of the carrey comedy ace ventura : pet detective  three writers , including carrey , worked on the slapstick story , which sends a self-styled " pet detective " on the trail of a stolen dolphin  carrey gets to do his " official " schtick as he snoops around greater miami  all of this is pretty harmless stuff up until the point that you realize that the writers have absolutely no intention of focusing on anyone * other * than carrey   ( suggested alternate title--jim carrey : will do anything for a laugh  which is ironic , since children are , probably , carrey's best audience  sure , carrey has his moments  but what can you say about a film whose high-points include watching carrey slink around to the theme from " mission impossible ? " ace ventura has one glaring incongruity .
wealth , influence and privileges of men connected with mafia are enough for henry hill to seduce his future wife karen ( played by lorraine bracco ) , who would afterwards remain loyal to her husband despite infidelities , domestic abuse , arrests and would even be accomplice to his own private drug dealing business lorraine bracco is , on the other hand , very effective and believable as karen hill , wife who gradually descends into same moral cesspool as her husband .
scorsese managed to create a vision which is effective and complete despite being full of contradictions that would ripped the film apart in the hands of less talented filmmaker after being exposed to two and half hours of the film and three decades of criminal history ( based on some notorious real life events ) , the audience understands why the characters chose such dangerous life paths , trading the superficial and short-lasting glamour and prosperity of a criminal to the dullness and poverty of honest citizens scorsese also manages to break viewer's moralistic inhibitions by showing truly revolting material - scenes that depict personal tragedies , broken homes , human depravity , violence , bloodshed and murder - in all their uncompromising reality , but in a manner that would make it amusing and funny to the audience even if we don't pay attention to skills with which potentially disturbing material becomes eye pleasing and entertaining , we should admit that scorsese displays his talents of truly original and creative filmmaker such scenes , although they require very great skill and patience during their shootings , became very popular among other directors in 1990s another essential element of goodfellas is large but superb collection of great acting talents liotta , on the other hand , improves general impression by very realistic and menacing portrayal of drug addiction as a combination of clever sociological study , black humour and innovative filmmaking goodfellas became something only the truly great films could do - work of art and excellent popular entertainment in the same time because of this achievement , and also because of the great influence on future filmmakers , this cinematic gem deserves its rightful place among the best films of 1990s .
at the age of 13 he gets recruited in the criminal organisation of paulie cicero ( played by paul sorvino ) , local mob boss , and gradually climbs up the ladder starting with small errands paul sorvino is also very effective as patriarch mafioso , and among the supporting cast most memorable is chuck low as pestering small-time gangster who unknowingly digs his own grave .
after couple of years , together with his best childhood friend tommy de vito ( played by joe pesci ) , he joins the crew of expert thieves led by jimmy conway ( played by robert de niro ) the most respectable among them is robert de niro , but his character , who happen to be most quiet and business-like member of criminal trio , gets overshadowed by two of his friends and colleagues .
after couple of years , together with his best childhood friend tommy de vito ( played by joe pesci ) , he joins the crew of expert thieves led by jimmy conway ( played by robert de niro ) joe pesci deserved his " oscar " for supporting role of homicidal psychopath tommy , and his lines , including ad-libs , probably represent the most memorable element of the film .
three of the men , michael , steven ( john savage ) , and nick ( christopher walken ) will be leaving shortly for vietnam , but not before steven gets married .
three of the men , michael , steven ( john savage ) , and nick ( christopher walken ) will be leaving shortly for vietnam , but not before steven gets married .
after the marriage , the group , including axel ( chuck aspegren ) , spend one last day on a hunting trip , one of their favorite past-times .
after a days work , the men leave their jobs at a factory to head down to the local bar , where john ( george dzundza ) works .
michael , portrayed perfectly by robert de niro , is shown early on as the natural leader of the group .
we will never have a chance to discover if tupac shakur could have been a great actor , but he had that unique quality in his eyes tupac shakur made a career in music and movies playing the hard case , and living the life to back it up .
in gridlock'd , an oddly effective combination of gritty drama and social satire , shakur and his co-star tim roth take sketchy characters and make them exciting to watch through the pure energy of their talent and chemistry .
shakur and roth play ezekiel " spoon " whitmore and alexander " stretch " rome , two detroit buddies who share a spoken word/jazz trio , an apartment and a drug addiction with cookie ( thandie newton ) .
the government might be the least of their obstacles , however , as they find themselves suspects in the murder of a drug dealer , and on the run from a nasty thug ( vondie curtis hall ) and where the unhinged d-fens became a heroic surrogate for audiences , writer/director vondie curtis hall refuses to let spoon and stretch off the hook for their own part in the situation .
in falling down , michael douglas' d-fens ( the character's personalized license plate , echoed in gridlock'd by the drug lord d-reper's plates ) whips out a gun because he can't get breakfast at mcdonald's ; in gridlock'd , spoon and stretch are unarmed against the demands placed on them before they can get into a rehab center .
synopsis : when a meteorite crashlands in the arizona desert , community college professors ira kane ( duchovny ) and harry block ( jones ) are first on the scene  it stars duchovny , and although one might question his judgment in lampooning his " x-files " character so soon after leaving the tv series , it should certainly provide him with plenty of ammunition  duchovny has stunningly little in the way of material to work with .
 soon the army , advised by dr allison reed ( moore ) , moves in and forces kane and block out  and then there's moore , who may not have much prior experience in comedy , but who has certainly proven her ability as an actress  moore is totally wasted , her clumsy shtick getting very old , very fast .
synopsis : when a meteorite crashlands in the arizona desert , community college professors ira kane ( duchovny ) and harry block ( jones ) are first on the scene  it has its moments ( a scene in which jones' body is invaded by an alien is particularly entertaining ) , but there are embarrassingly long stretches that are utterly devoid of humour .
 hannibal lecter in michael mann's forensics thriller , manhunter , scottish character actor brian cox brings something special to every movie he works on .
 filmmaker michael cuesta uses it as a ( pretty transparent ) metaphor of dangerous escape for his 15-year old protagonist , howie ( paul franklin dano ) .
 there is unnecessary padding with howie's miserable dad ( bruce altman ) in the hot seat for a white-collar crime , degenerate youngsters who get their kicks from robbing middle-class houses , and some homoerotic shenanigans with wise-ass gary terrio ( billy kay ) , a handsome artful dodger .
 there is unnecessary padding with howie's miserable dad ( bruce altman ) in the hot seat for a white-collar crime , degenerate youngsters who get their kicks from robbing middle-class houses , and some homoerotic shenanigans with wise-ass gary terrio ( billy kay ) , a handsome artful dodger .
 for those of us who haven't read the james lee burke novel that heaven's prisoners is based on , do not rabidly go out and buy tickets to movies featuring the combined talents of alec baldwin and eric roberts , feel vaguely depressed by the notion of swamps , gangsters with louisiana accents , plots , sub-plots , more plots , and well , really just want to see teri hatcher naked , this is one movie you're going to worry the price of admission over  hopeful still ? well , let me share my moment of sheer panic , and then the cold enervation of the big let-down when a semi-robed hatcher purrs to alec baldwin , " what do you think of my butterfly ? "  heaven's prisoners is about ex-alchoholic ex-cop dave robicheaux ( alec baldwin ) who's trying to discover life anew running a bait shop and boat hire business with his loving , down-to-earth wife annie ( kelly lynch )  as dave robicheaux , alec baldwin is fat .
 for those of us who haven't read the james lee burke novel that heaven's prisoners is based on , do not rabidly go out and buy tickets to movies featuring the combined talents of alec baldwin and eric roberts , feel vaguely depressed by the notion of swamps , gangsters with louisiana accents , plots , sub-plots , more plots , and well , really just want to see teri hatcher naked , this is one movie you're going to worry the price of admission over  eric roberts as bubba rocque , always believable as the woman-abusing bad guy who knows how to box ( see final analysis , coincidentally also directed by phil joanou ) is believable here as the woman-abusing bad guy who knows how to box .
 for those of us who haven't read the james lee burke novel that heaven's prisoners is based on , do not rabidly go out and buy tickets to movies featuring the combined talents of alec baldwin and eric roberts , feel vaguely depressed by the notion of swamps , gangsters with louisiana accents , plots , sub-plots , more plots , and well , really just want to see teri hatcher naked , this is one movie you're going to worry the price of admission over  hopeful still ? well , let me share my moment of sheer panic , and then the cold enervation of the big let-down when a semi-robed hatcher purrs to alec baldwin , " what do you think of my butterfly ? "  no naked teri hatcher  and lest we forget teri hatcher's role in all this , this being her rather well-publicised paid vacation from playing lois lane on tv's " adventures of lois & clark " .
 heaven's prisoners is about ex-alchoholic ex-cop dave robicheaux ( alec baldwin ) who's trying to discover life anew running a bait shop and boat hire business with his loving , down-to-earth wife annie ( kelly lynch ) .
 on the other hand , mary stuart masterson ( some kind of wonderful , fried green tomatoes , benny & joon ) cast as a down-and-out stripper who has her fingers broken is quite a breath of fresh air , with just the right mix of cynicism , warmth , insecurity and humour to be the movie's only endearing character .
 with the noisy fire roaring all about them and with the trapped people huddled near their gasoline-filled cars , smokejumper monica ( christianne hirt ) tells them to get away from their soon-to-explode vehicles .
 our show's two heroes , the crew's chief , wynt perkins , played laconically by scott glenn , and his second-in-command , jesse graves , played by howie long in a weak attempt to be the next steven seagal , enter the burning house looking for the little girl  most of the highly predictable movie is a long chase in which poor howie long is given one ridiculous stunt after another to look silly performing .
 our show's two heroes , the crew's chief , wynt perkins , played laconically by scott glenn , and his second-in-command , jesse graves , played by howie long in a weak attempt to be the next steven seagal , enter the burning house looking for the little girl .
 not content with a traditional firefighting story , chris soth's screenplay attempts to jazz it up by having william forsythe from palookaville play a vicious killer named randy earl shaye who sets a forest fire so that he can join the crew to put it out and then escape .
 it is edgar's ( bruno putzulu ) self-appointed task to capture these moments after a recent breakup , to define a central idea : " it's only when things are over that they make sense .
 second of all , angelina jolie is horribly miscast in this part  every look in jolie's eyes screams " psycho " ! then of course , you have the case of the " patsy " husband , a man who just can't seem to figure out anything in time  i liked the locations in the movie and the groovy score , but my primary reason for slipping three notches onto this bedpost is for the gratuitous shots of jolie's boobies ( that's two points right there ! ) and another one for antonio's ass ( hairless , just for the record ) .
the film revolves around the kidnapping of peter bowman ( david morse ) , an american engineer working in south america who is kidnapped during a mass ambush of civilians by anti-government soldiers but when things go wrong -- as they always do in these situations -- terry and his team ( which includes the most surprising casting choice of the year : david caruso ) take matters into their own hands the biggest surprise for me was not the chemistry between crowe and ryan , but that between crowe and david caruso dug out from b-movie hell , caruso pulls off a gutsy performance as crowe's right hand gun while providing most of the film's humor ryan cries a lot and smokes too many cigarettes , david morse ends up getting everyone at the guerilla camp to hate him , and crowe provides another memorable acting turn as the stoic , gunslinger character of terry thorne .
consider the strange coincidence of russell crowe's character in proof of life making the moves on a distraught wife played by meg ryan's character in the film -- all while the real russell crowe was hitching up with married woman meg ryan in the outside world with no choice available to her , bowman's wife alice ( ryan ) hires terry thorne ( crowe ) , a highly skilled negotiator and rescue operative , to arrange the return of her husband the biggest surprise for me was not the chemistry between crowe and ryan , but that between crowe and david caruso ryan cries a lot and smokes too many cigarettes , david morse ends up getting everyone at the guerilla camp to hate him , and crowe provides another memorable acting turn as the stoic , gunslinger character of terry thorne .
proof of life , russell crowe's one-two punch of a deft kidnap and rescue thriller , is one of those rare gems consider the strange coincidence of russell crowe's character in proof of life making the moves on a distraught wife played by meg ryan's character in the film -- all while the real russell crowe was hitching up with married woman meg ryan in the outside world with no choice available to her , bowman's wife alice ( ryan ) hires terry thorne ( crowe ) , a highly skilled negotiator and rescue operative , to arrange the return of her husband the biggest surprise for me was not the chemistry between crowe and ryan , but that between crowe and david caruso dug out from b-movie hell , caruso pulls off a gutsy performance as crowe's right hand gun while providing most of the film's humor ryan cries a lot and smokes too many cigarettes , david morse ends up getting everyone at the guerilla camp to hate him , and crowe provides another memorable acting turn as the stoic , gunslinger character of terry thorne .
the film revolves around the kidnapping of peter bowman ( david morse ) , an american engineer working in south america who is kidnapped during a mass ambush of civilians by anti-government soldiers but when things go wrong -- as they always do in these situations -- terry and his team ( which includes the most surprising casting choice of the year : david caruso ) take matters into their own hands the biggest surprise for me was not the chemistry between crowe and ryan , but that between crowe and david caruso ryan cries a lot and smokes too many cigarettes , david morse ends up getting everyone at the guerilla camp to hate him , and crowe provides another memorable acting turn as the stoic , gunslinger character of terry thorne .
 james wood portrays jack crow , a man obsessed with killing vampires , whose soul reason for living is based on revenge ( they killed his parents ) , but this is not a good excuse for being more obnoxious than the vampires .
 as for adam baldwin , he is nothing more than a stooge who is ordered to beat women when the director shouts ? action' , and the script should have been reworked to avoid much offence against the female sex .
brian de palma , the director who bought us carrie , dressed to kill and mission : impossible is back , and has bought all his technical expertise with him  nic cage plays rick santaro , a fast talking cop who is watching a boxing match with his friend commander kevin dunne ( sinise  nic cage and gary sinise try to inject some life into some poorly realised characters , but it's no use  we're supposed to be on cage's side , because his character becomes nicer throughout the film  while the performances are intriguing , especially by newcomer carla gugino as a sexy 'number cruncher' wrapped up in the case , there's no way of altering the fact that snake eyes is a terminal case of style of substance , and unless you're a big fan of either cage or flash directing , should be avoided .
 nic cage plays rick santaro , a fast talking cop who is watching a boxing match with his friend commander kevin dunne ( sinise  nic cage and gary sinise try to inject some life into some poorly realised characters , but it's no use  poor gary sinise's character is terrible , who completely changes throughout the start , the middle and the end , in an appalling way .
 while the performances are intriguing , especially by newcomer carla gugino as a sexy 'number cruncher' wrapped up in the case , there's no way of altering the fact that snake eyes is a terminal case of style of substance , and unless you're a big fan of either cage or flash directing , should be avoided .
dreamworks pictures presents a jinks/ cohen company production kevin spacey annette bening " american beauty " thora birch allison janney peter gallagher mena suvari wes bentley and chris cooper co-producers stan wlodkowski alan ball music by thomas newman costume designer julie weiss film editor tariq anway chris greenbury production designer naomi shohan director of photography conrad l  "with that piece of dialogue , we are fully introduced to lester burnham ( kevin spacey ) , a 42 year old man trapped within his own life kevin spacey turns in one of this years most pragmatic performances  spacey's performance is so remarkably subtle and ingenuous , that we can be certain that come oscar ? time , we can be assured to see him name among the five nominees .
dreamworks pictures presents a jinks/ cohen company production kevin spacey annette bening " american beauty " thora birch allison janney peter gallagher mena suvari wes bentley and chris cooper co-producers stan wlodkowski alan ball music by thomas newman costume designer julie weiss film editor tariq anway chris greenbury production designer naomi shohan director of photography conrad l carolyn burnham ( annette bening ) , is the prototypical career woman/ homemaker annette bening also turns in what may be the best performance of her career  bening makes the character of carolyn so compelling as to be identifiable to almost anyone .
dreamworks pictures presents a jinks/ cohen company production kevin spacey annette bening " american beauty " thora birch allison janney peter gallagher mena suvari wes bentley and chris cooper co-producers stan wlodkowski alan ball music by thomas newman costume designer julie weiss film editor tariq anway chris greenbury production designer naomi shohan director of photography conrad l colonel fitts ( chris cooper ) is an angry and frightened man praise must also go to chris cooper who brings yet another angry father role to life with depth and resonance .
dreamworks pictures presents a jinks/ cohen company production kevin spacey annette bening " american beauty " thora birch allison janney peter gallagher mena suvari wes bentley and chris cooper co-producers stan wlodkowski alan ball music by thomas newman costume designer julie weiss film editor tariq anway chris greenbury production designer naomi shohan director of photography conrad l most notably is barbara fitts ( allison janney ) , the almost catatonic wife of retired marine colonel fitts .
dreamworks pictures presents a jinks/ cohen company production kevin spacey annette bening " american beauty " thora birch allison janney peter gallagher mena suvari wes bentley and chris cooper co-producers stan wlodkowski alan ball music by thomas newman costume designer julie weiss film editor tariq anway chris greenbury production designer naomi shohan director of photography conrad l he quits his job ( actually blackmailing his employer for one year's salary ) , starts smoking pot , fantasizes about his daughter's girlfriend angela ( mena suvari , in a marvelous performance here ) , starts working out , and finally takes a job at the local fast food outlet .
but as soon as kiefer sutherland began speaking the narrative monologue , describing " the strangers " and their reasons for contacting human beings , i was hooked sutherland played the role as a true veteran upon the completion of his monologue , the camera arrives on sutherland in such a fashion that you can only wonder how long alex proyas spent on cinematography .
synopsis : bobby garfield ( yelchin ) lives in a small town with his mirthless widowed mother ( hope davis ) yelchin is very good as bobby , finding a good mix of innocence and resignation .
synopsis : bobby garfield ( yelchin ) lives in a small town with his mirthless widowed mother ( hope davis ) less successful is davis , whose strident elizabeth comes across as overly cartoonish .
bobby's world revolves around his friends , especially the spritely carol ( boorem ) more splendid still is boorem , whom i praised highly for her work in " along came a spider " and who is simply radiant here as carol .
ted brautigan ( hopkins ) is an enigmatic man to whom bobby takes an immediate liking and then there is hopkins , who despite playing such a quiet , introspective character as ted , nonetheless commands our attention every time he is onscreen .
the action is seen through the eyes of lenny ( maaia sethna ) , a young parsee girl , but it is really about her nanny , shanta .
two of the men are suitors : hasan ( rahul khanna ) , a hindu , and dil navaz ( aamir khan ) , a muslim .
two of the men are suitors : hasan ( rahul khanna ) , a hindu , and dil navaz ( aamir khan ) , a muslim .
the others--sikh , hindu , muslim--are older ; some are married ; but all appreciate shanta , who is played by the stirringly beautiful nandita das .
just ask paul vitti ( robert deniro ) , a man who finds his job as mafia head to be rather stress inducing casting robert deniro as paul vitti is something of an in-joke , i think placed in this mobster's shoes , deniro gets to spoof characters he himself played in films like the godfather , part ii and casino .
and who better than billy crystal after appearing in bottom-of-the-barrel flops , father's day and my giant , crystal finally finds a reliable costar and some very promising material here the only character who weakens the payoff is crystal's bride-to-be ( lisa kudrow ) and near the end , seeing billy crystal attempt to walk and talk like a mob boss is truly a special treat .
and who better than billy crystal the man behind the camera is harold ramis , whose credits include ghostbusters ( as writer and star ) , and his best directing effort , the bill murray vehicle , groundhog day and near the end , seeing billy crystal attempt to walk and talk like a mob boss is truly a special treat .
the only character who weakens the payoff is crystal's bride-to-be ( lisa kudrow ) playing the same dumbed-down role as she does in friends , kudrow is amusing , but doesn't fit into this comedy mold as well as the director may have hoped .
joe viterelli is hilarious as jelly , vitti's pea brained right-hand man , and chazz palminteri is a show stopper playing a fellow mobster who's in desperate need of the definition of `closure' .
 along the way ichabod gets help from a bewitching ( literally ) young woman ( christina ricci ) and the son of one of the murder victims ( marc pickering )  ricci seems to put all her effort into seeming enigmatic , which guarantees that we won't sympathize with her character .
 " in the movie ichabod crane ( johnny depp ) is a new york city police constable who is trying to introduce scientific methods of investigation to his superiors  although he's impressed me with his work in other films , depp doesn't seem to know what to do with ichabod , and his dialogue is hampered by stilted diction that's supposed to pass for an 18th century accent .
 along the way ichabod gets help from a bewitching ( literally ) young woman ( christina ricci ) and the son of one of the murder victims ( marc pickering ) .
maybe it was the casting of the underrated jeremy piven in a supporting role , and the hilarious eugene levy both piven and molly shannon make nice sidekick characterson the flipside , films such as you've got mail , made in heaven , and even high fidelity are the quiet inspirations for the film's main journey at hand .
maybe it was the casting of the underrated jeremy piven in a supporting role , and the hilarious eugene levy what happens then is an enjoyable and often hilarious cat-and-mouse game with the fates - involving such items as mistaken identity , a graduate homage , john corbett as a freaky new age musician , and eugene levy as an irate and crazed salesman -- to find out if that " thing " was right after all .
maybe it was my hope that john cusack would get the redemption he justly deserves after such crap as high fidelity , con air , and pushing tin two people , john trager ( john cusack ) and sara thomas ( kate beckinsale , looking ever so hot ) , have a chance encounter over a pair of gloves -- with buck henry smack dab in the middle but with each of them already involved with other parties , sara has john write his name and number on a $5 bill and she writes her name and number on a copy of love in the time of cholera years later and on opposite coasts of america , john and sara -- both engaged but still unsure whether they have found their soul mates -- decide to seek each other out to rest their doubts what happens then is an enjoyable and often hilarious cat-and-mouse game with the fates - involving such items as mistaken identity , a graduate homage , john corbett as a freaky new age musician , and eugene levy as an irate and crazed salesman -- to find out if that " thing " was right after all but it's what happens to the unexpecting characters left behind in the romantic wake after john and sara find happiness this is the most unsettling part of the picture .
two people , john trager ( john cusack ) and sara thomas ( kate beckinsale , looking ever so hot ) , have a chance encounter over a pair of gloves -- with buck henry smack dab in the middle .
two people , john trager ( john cusack ) and sara thomas ( kate beckinsale , looking ever so hot ) , have a chance encounter over a pair of gloves -- with buck henry smack dab in the middle .
-- comedy , rated pg , runs about 1 : 40 -- starring : john goodman , kathy moriarty , and a bunch of teenagers -- directed by joe dante and written by charles hass --summary : lawrence woolsley ( john goodman ) brings his new horror film mant !to premier.
-- comedy , rated pg , runs about 1 : 40 -- starring : john goodman , kathy moriarty , and a bunch of teenagers -- directed by joe dante and written by charles hass --summary : lawrence woolsley ( john goodman ) brings his new horror film mant !to premier.
susan granger's review of " jeepers creepers " ( mgm/ua entertainment ) this nasty , little horror film begins as a bickering brother ( justin long ) and sister ( gina philips ) are driving through the desolate countryside on their way home from college and spy a man dropping wrapped-up bodies down a drainage pipe .
susan granger's review of " jeepers creepers " ( mgm/ua entertainment ) this nasty , little horror film begins as a bickering brother ( justin long ) and sister ( gina philips ) are driving through the desolate countryside on their way home from college and spy a man dropping wrapped-up bodies down a drainage pipe .
 long flees but now the monstrous , winged creeper ( jonathan breck ) is after both of them ! eileen brennan appears briefly as the cat lady and patricia belcher is jezelle , a psychic who explains the evil creature's bizarre feeding habits .
 long flees but now the monstrous , winged creeper ( jonathan breck ) is after both of them ! eileen brennan appears briefly as the cat lady and patricia belcher is jezelle , a psychic who explains the evil creature's bizarre feeding habits .
 long flees but now the monstrous , winged creeper ( jonathan breck ) is after both of them ! eileen brennan appears briefly as the cat lady and patricia belcher is jezelle , a psychic who explains the evil creature's bizarre feeding habits .
plot : based on the wildly popular " jerry springer " tv show , this movie follows the lives of two groups of people before they make their bizarre appearances on the infamous program  critique : the truth is that if i didn't have a day job , i would probably watch the real " jerry springer " show every day  i never thought i would utter the word boring in the same sentence as jerry springer , but this film is an absolute yawn-fest , despite offering various scenes featuring simulated blowjobs , lesbians , t&a and tv violence ( who would've guessed that ? )  unfortunately , it doesn't seem as though screenwriter jon bernstein spent more than a drunken weekend watching real " jerry springer " reruns to complete his script , leaving us with a boring film , featuring no laughs , one-dimensional characters , and no fun whatsoever  little known facts about this film and its stars : jerry springer used to be the mayor of cincinnati , ohio .
 two is never greenlight a sci-fi film starring john travolta .
 a young rogue named jonnie goodboy tyler , played with dramatic flair by barry pepper , ventures from the safety of the caves into the city to uncover the truth about the `demons .
the story of us tells the story of ben ( bruce willis ) and katie ( michelle pfeiffer ) jordan , and asks the question , " can a marriage survive 15 years of marriage ? "the film is about two individuals who have come together , spent a good chunk of their lives together , and shows when our main characters are " him " and " her " ( during the bad times ) , and when they are " us " ( during the good times ) bruce willis , a usual action/adventure star , has certainly turned himself around in the past year- he went from being a man who was being typecast to the same role in action movies , to a distinguished , sophisticated actor , as in last summer's the sixth sense ; and now in the story of us , willis shows the world what he can really do if he is fed a good script although i wouldn't pick willis as the choice actor for ben jordan , willis handles himself nicely , and shines in a few of the film's most powerful scenes , enough that make his performance a definite contender comes awards season .
the story of us tells the story of ben ( bruce willis ) and katie ( michelle pfeiffer ) jordan , and asks the question , " can a marriage survive 15 years of marriage ? "the film is about two individuals who have come together , spent a good chunk of their lives together , and shows when our main characters are " him " and " her " ( during the bad times ) , and when they are " us " ( during the good times ) where to start about michelle pfeiffer ?pfeiffer's performance is spellbinding and ultimately strong , as she brings her character to life with such charisma and emotion , you wonder how , how it is possible for someone to portray a real person with such realism pfeiffer's performance is one that if not recognized by the academy next spring , will be in the heart's of any viewer that has watched this moving film .
 " as the movie opens , therapist catharine deane ( jennifer lopez ) treats a catatonic boy ( colton james ) by entering his mind through some sort of virtual reality technique that's never fully explained  singer lopez seems to think she's in a video as well ; she devotes more time to posing in elaborate costumes than she does to acting  however , catharine's character is hardly developed at all , and lopez has no depth to offer the role .
 meanwhile , killer carl stargher ( vincent d'onofrio ) has claimed another victim .
 meanwhile , killer carl stargher ( vincent d'onofrio ) has claimed another victim  although carl's been doing this for awhile , he's recently become sloppy , and fbi agent peter novak ( vince vaughn ) is closing in fast .
 not fast enough , though , to keep carl from sticking another woman ( tara subkoff ) in the cell or to catch him before he suffers a schizophrenic attack that leaves him in a coma .
 " as the movie opens , therapist catharine deane ( jennifer lopez ) treats a catatonic boy ( colton james ) by entering his mind through some sort of virtual reality technique that's never fully explained .
hogarth hughes ( voice of eli marienthal ) is a spirited young lad who lives with his hard-working single mother , annie ( jennifer aniston ) , in a small town in maine the film delivers several serious messages , the most important of which is one's ability to choose one's own fate the characters' faces are done quite well , drawn realistically enough to make the personalities credible , but the features are exaggerated so as to allow for the cartoonish expressions that provide for comic relief fine voice work is turned in by young eli marienthal as hogarth , and jennifer aniston is surprisingly convincing as his waitress mother unlike several cartoon features , each character is actually a developed personality , rather than a stereotype , and is actually integral to the plot , rather than being a superfluous comic-relief sidekick ( a clich ? disney still hasn't ditched ) the film isn't only around to deliver heavy-handed messages , though .
hogarth hughes ( voice of eli marienthal ) is a spirited young lad who lives with his hard-working single mother , annie ( jennifer aniston ) , in a small town in maine fine voice work is turned in by young eli marienthal as hogarth , and jennifer aniston is surprisingly convincing as his waitress mother .
he comes across a giant robot ( vin diesel ) from space that eats metal for food after saving the robot , nicknamed the iron giant , from electric shock , hogarth befriends the creature and takes him in as a pet of sorts fine voice work is turned in by young eli marienthal as hogarth , and jennifer aniston is surprisingly convincing as his waitress mother the scenes in which hogarth teaches the giant to do certain things , such as dive into a pool , are handled well , and director brad bird clearly has a sense of comic timing , having worked on " the simpsons " for many years .
realizing he can't just keep the giant in a barn all the time , and that the giant needs food , he takes him to a junkyard owned by dean ( harry connick jr harry connick jr .
it soon becomes apparent that dean and hogarth can't keep the giant a secret forever , because a government spook named kent mansley ( christopher mcdonald ) has been brought in to investigate mysterious sightings in the surrounding forest area and considers the giant a threat to national security .
 beautifully choreographed by robin shou , who also plays liu kang , the fight scenes are both mind-blowing and graceful , acrobatic enough to make olympic gymnasts weep  or at least let robin shou direct .
the film , which won best picture in 1967 focuses on vergil tibbs , played superbly by sidney poitier as a fearless african american police officer from philadelphia who refuses to give up on an investigation in a white town where is he not wanted poitier also gives an excellent , noteworthy voice to his character however , unlike " the hurricane " where denzel washington dominated over the rest of the cast , poitier shares the spotlight with rod steiger , who won best actor for his excellent performance .
however , unlike " the hurricane " where denzel washington dominated over the rest of the cast , poitier shares the spotlight with rod steiger , who won best actor for his excellent performance .
however , unlike " the hurricane " where denzel washington dominated over the rest of the cast , poitier shares the spotlight with rod steiger , who won best actor for his excellent performance as a sheriff who helps tibbs and warns him of the dangers around him , steiger shows a great amount of skill in his role what i really enjoyed about steiger's character was that he did not completely abandon his friends or connect with tibbs at the end of the film .
 ( a congratulations has to be given to actor scott wilson .
general bogan ( frank overton ) , taking orders directly from the president of the united states himself ( henry fonda ) , is powerless--the fate of the world lies in the hands of an automated , pre-programmed system that may not be stoppable , simply because the creators of the war machines were too efficient in their task to make a no-win situation winnable .
general bogan ( frank overton ) , taking orders directly from the president of the united states himself ( henry fonda ) , is powerless--the fate of the world lies in the hands of an automated , pre-programmed system that may not be stoppable , simply because the creators of the war machines were too efficient in their task to make a no-win situation winnable just how will the soviet union's leader react , and what can the president do to convey his best intentions ? ( just * how * does one pass off the deaths of millions of people as an * mishap * ? )with the help of his translator buck ( larry hagman ) , the president negotiates at length with the soviet leader , in scenes that prove amazingly taut and powerful in their simplicity , with lumet's long takes of fonda and hagman in the same frame , exchanging the dialog between the president and the soviet leader .
-------------------- " fail-safe " ( usa , 1964 ) drama , 111 minutesscreenplay by walter bernstein based on the novel by eugene burdick and harvey wheeler produced by max e most of this is through the film's use of the character groeteschele ( walter matthau ) , an arrogant civilian theorist of nuclear weapons use who , incidentally , is on the president's advising staff for analyzing the statistical plausibility of waging a nuclear war nevertheless , under lumet's direction and walter bernstein's intelligent adaptation of burdick's and wheeler's novel , the film continues to have a lasting effect even after the events on screen have unfolded .
yet his answer to the arms race is not to slow down and try to cool the situation off , as general black ( dan o'herlihy ) has often recommended dramatically , the ending is quite powerful , and the use of o'herlihy's character as the symbolic " matador " ( providing a bookend to the film by ending the story while tying into his dream sequence from the film's opening ) , is particularly appropriate but it was the conscious , human choice to * initialize * this automatic arming that " fail-safe " also finds dangerous it's just fortunate that both sides were finally able to come to their senses and slow down , rather than continuing groeteschele's dangerous approach of speeding up and causing a possible meltdown .
just how will the soviet union's leader react , and what can the president do to convey his best intentions ? ( just * how * does one pass off the deaths of millions of people as an * mishap * ? )with the help of his translator buck ( larry hagman ) , the president negotiates at length with the soviet leader , in scenes that prove amazingly taut and powerful in their simplicity , with lumet's long takes of fonda and hagman in the same frame , exchanging the dialog between the president and the soviet leader .
in wonder boys michael douglas plays an aged writer \ professor with such lived-in naturalism that i believe it may be his best performance .
katie holmes plays hannah , a beautiful , talented writing student just itching to get in grady's pants at first i found it extremely difficult to believe that someone as beautiful as hannah would desire grady ( maybe it's because i'm jealous , and wish holmes was throwing herself at me , after all i may just be a lowly internet critic but at least i still have all my teeth ) , then i think of douglas's real life companion , the breathtaking catherine zeta jones .
robert downy j downy has mastered the gleefully dry hyper articulate wit of many a hipster intellectual the gags are like those in the great robert altman ( m * a * s * h , the long goodbye ) movies , where jokes exist as asides on the fringes , like jokes in life often do .
tom hanks plays joe fox , the insanely likeable owner of a discount book chain and meg ryan plays kathleen kelley , the even more insanely likeable proprietor of a family-run children's book shop called , in a nice homage , the shop around the corner .
tom hanks plays joe fox , the insanely likeable owner of a discount book chain and meg ryan plays kathleen kelley , the even more insanely likeable proprietor of a family-run children's book shop called , in a nice homage , the shop around the corner .
michael j  fox does the voice of stuart himself and just like in the " homeward bound " movies does a fantastic job and brings more out of stuart than anyone else could .
for the human actors geena davis who never gives a bad performance does not disappoint here as well .
she fits nicely in her character and there is a good chemistry between her and hugh laurie who plays mr .
they have a little boy george ( played by the adorable jonathan lipnicki ) and now they have a new son both make us believe they are happily in love and married and jonathan lipnicki as their song is even more adorable than he was in 1996's " jerry maguire " .
 all this explained ( in flashback ) to some grand pooh-bah counsel by martian police official melanie ballard ( natasha henstridge , from the sub- " species " films ) , the only returnee on a silly-looking train  henstridge , her blonde hair pulled back tightly and awkwardly into a ponytail , ice cube ( as the appropriately-named " desolation " ) , pam grier ( briefly , oddly--who wanted to work with whom i wonder ? ) , and a host of extras all assuming that the story and special effects were going to carry this film and therefore they didn't need to try too hard  the final exchange between henstridge and , er , cube though is both audible * and * priceless  henstridge keeps her top on ( miraculously ) , and 2 .
 henstridge , her blonde hair pulled back tightly and awkwardly into a ponytail , ice cube ( as the appropriately-named " desolation " ) , pam grier ( briefly , oddly--who wanted to work with whom i wonder ? ) , and a host of extras all assuming that the story and special effects were going to carry this film and therefore they didn't need to try too hard .
 all this explained ( in flashback ) to some grand pooh-bah counsel by martian police official melanie ballard ( natasha henstridge , from the sub- " species " films ) , the only returnee on a silly-looking train  officer ballard went in to bring back incarcerated felon james " desolation " williams ; what she found was not a pretty picture  henstridge , her blonde hair pulled back tightly and awkwardly into a ponytail , ice cube ( as the appropriately-named " desolation " ) , pam grier ( briefly , oddly--who wanted to work with whom i wonder ? ) , and a host of extras all assuming that the story and special effects were going to carry this film and therefore they didn't need to try too hard  the final exchange between henstridge and , er , cube though is both audible * and * priceless .
like " jesus christ superstar , " which examined the rise and fall of jesus in his last days from a fame perspective ( in the cool tune " superstar , " a dead judas comes back from the dead to ask jesus why he didn't spread his message wider ) , " evita " takes an inventive stance on its topic , this time being the famed wife of argentinian dictator , juan per ? n , eva , who slept her way to the top and became famous chiefly because she got attention , much like the woman playing her : madonna ( although i think madonna did rise to the top for her musical talent , among other things ) madonna's golden globe winning performance is much like the movie : starts kinda downhill then goes up quickly , remaning there for the rest of the film .
 " evita " deals with the rise and fall of eva per ? n , a woman who captured the heart of the nation after marrying juan ( jonathan pryce ) , then died at the young age of 33 , creating an international stir of mourning not unlike that of princess di ( the two do share a bit in common , although it wasn't like di slept to " the top " ) and jonathan pryce is pretty awesome , although very brief at times , in his role as juan , seeming to put on a poker face for his melancholy facade .
but what comes after is a lifeless , un-entertaining , and totally unrewarding sequence where she cons a singer ( jimmy nail ) into taking eva to buenos aires after a one-night stand alan parker , no stranger to bizarre musicals ( he's done " fame , " " the committments , " " bugsy malone , " and " pink floyd the wall " - the latter which is absolutely brilliant ) , nails the film , exposing everything for what it is .
the portrayal of eva in the beginning is too soft , seeming like parker and oliver stone , who adapted it for the screen , are afraid to present her for what she is , even while it's being narrated by a hater of eva's , the omnipotent ( antonio banderas ) , who presents her in a negative light antonio banderas , who is almost like a guilty pleasure these days ( i'm one of the few people who thinks he rocks ) , is extremely comanding in his performance , presenting a lovable narrator .
 ghosts of mars stars natasha henstridge as a tough as nails , pill-poppin' , martian cop , sent with her squadron to retrieve " demolition " williams ( ice cube ) from a remote mining town for trial back home .
 ghosts of mars stars natasha henstridge as a tough as nails , pill-poppin' , martian cop , sent with her squadron to retrieve " demolition " williams ( ice cube ) from a remote mining town for trial back home  most of these moments come off as kwik-e-mart wisdom , dispensed heartily around the slushee machine of life by the even-tempered streetwise hand of ice cube .
starring : keanu reeves , laurence fishburne , joe pantelianosome may be disappointed with the matrix a man played by keanu reeves is about to find that out , when is kidnapped and almost coaxed to go into the real world laurence fishburne , his guide of sorts plays his character well as does keanu reeves .
starring : keanu reeves , laurence fishburne , joe pantelianosome may be disappointed with the matrix laurence fishburne , his guide of sorts plays his character well as does keanu reeves .
starring : keanu reeves , laurence fishburne , joe pantelianosome may be disappointed with the matrix .
once george clooney and nicole kidman enter the picture , it begins to take off george clooney is an air force colonel with connections all over the world he has a nice sarcastic wit and the rough edges that you expect from most clooney characters the story takes clooney and kidman across the globe , trying to figure out who has the weapons and where they are going with them  clooneygoes through bouts of sarcasm , frustration , determination , and revenge while kidman works against her own insecurity and self-doubt then we get clooney doing heroics in and out of a helicopter you're not gonna find her falling down so clooney can come back to save her george clooney is a real movie star .
once george clooney and nicole kidman enter the picture , it begins to take off nicole kidman is head of a white house team on weapons smuggling the story takes clooney and kidman across the globe , trying to figure out who has the weapons and where they are going with them  clooneygoes through bouts of sarcasm , frustration , determination , and revenge while kidman works against her own insecurity and self-doubt nicole kidman is an intelligent female action hero .
the story revolves around the attempts of political spin doctor conread brean ( robert deniro ) to distract the american public from the accusations that the president , who is up for re-election in two weeks , sexually harassed a young girl in the oval office .
brean , along with his assistant ( anne heche ) , decide to contact hollywood producer stanley motss ( dustin hoffman ) to enlist his help in concocting enough propaganda and special-effects trickery to make it appear that the u of course , not everything goes as planned ; the cia , for example , realizes what's going on and strikes a deal with the president's electoral opponent to report to the media that the " fighting " has ended , forcing motss and brean to come up with a new angle on the supposed albanian crisis .
brean , along with his assistant ( anne heche ) , decide to contact hollywood producer stanley motss ( dustin hoffman ) to enlist his help in concocting enough propaganda and special-effects trickery to make it appear that the u .
william " old shoe " schumann ( woody harrelson ) , an ex-military officer who turns out to be a first-class psycho .
 after these credits , a snapshot of actor jay underwood appears  jay underwood , as the stalker , turns toward melodrama a bit too much .
 maryam d'abo , about the only actor close to being a star here ( she played the bond chick in the living daylights ) , is equally adequate as the " stalked " of the title , even though she seems too ditzy at times to be a strong , independent business-owner  brooke ( d'abo ) needs to be ditzy , however , for the plot to proceed .
a search and rescue team led by miller ( fishburne ) is given the task to check for survivors of the event horizon .
 weir ( neill ) follows along to satisfy his curiosity on what actually happened to his otherwise technologically impressive ship .
 take adam sandler  the first half hour generated not one smile in me , with it's scenes of emotional abuse towards adam's character of bobby boucher not only by the cruel football players , but also by his very disturbed mother ( kathy bates - what is the world coming to ? )  and believe me , i'm not giving anything away by saying that sandler's team wins  my advice to adam is to try and follow in the footsteps of veteran comedians like williams and steve martin , who made a very smooth and successful transition from stage to screen .
 the first half hour generated not one smile in me , with it's scenes of emotional abuse towards adam's character of bobby boucher not only by the cruel football players , but also by his very disturbed mother ( kathy bates - what is the world coming to ? ) .
 the only things that keep this bomb from getting the big banana are the winning performances from henry winkler as the insecure coach and the severely underrated fairuza balk as bobby's love interest .
 the only things that keep this bomb from getting the big banana are the winning performances from henry winkler as the insecure coach and the severely underrated fairuza balk as bobby's love interest .
 my advice to adam is to try and follow in the footsteps of veteran comedians like williams and steve martin , who made a very smooth and successful transition from stage to screen .
 kinder ( kathleen turner ) and dr .
 heep ( christopher lloyd ) are two of the cold-hearted executives at the baby geniuses institute , where peculiar studies are going on .
 meanwhile , dom deluise plays a fellow who gets hit in the crotch with a monkey wrench ( hahaha ) .
 hmmmm , well , the main actor , justin chambers , is basically an uncharismatic version of chris o'donnell but with less range ( think about that ! ) , and mena suvari , is just plain off  it was boring for stretches , the acting was atrocious at times ( the " romantic " scene between suvari and chambers next to the lake reminded me of plays in high school which made you cringe ) , there was little reason to care for anyone and since when were the musketeers fat ? i will give the movie this much , and that is that its main reason for being ( its " raison-d'etre " , as the french would say ) , its fight sequences , do come through despite the lack of their numbers in the film  and can anyone please tell me how catherine deneuve got her name placed at the top of this film's credits ? hullo ? the film is called the musketeer and stars a dude name justin chambers .
 hmmmm , well , the main actor , justin chambers , is basically an uncharismatic version of chris o'donnell but with less range ( think about that ! ) , and mena suvari , is just plain off  suvari's fault or the director's , but i've definitely seen her at a much higher level than in this film  it was boring for stretches , the acting was atrocious at times ( the " romantic " scene between suvari and chambers next to the lake reminded me of plays in high school which made you cringe ) , there was little reason to care for anyone and since when were the musketeers fat ? i will give the movie this much , and that is that its main reason for being ( its " raison-d'etre " , as the french would say ) , its fight sequences , do come through despite the lack of their numbers in the film .
plot : a young french boy sees his parents killed before his eyes by tim roth , oops  the only semi-saving grace actor-wise is tim roth as the irrepressible " bad guy " , but once again , it's not something that we haven't seen before  a thousand times  by the same guy ! ! tim , please  change your shirt , man ! ) keep in mind that i have never strayed away from championing certain movies that are created simply for the sake of a " fun time " , but this flick just didn't cut it for me  it was boring for stretches , the acting was atrocious at times ( the " romantic " scene between suvari and chambers next to the lake reminded me of plays in high school which made you cringe ) , there was little reason to care for anyone and since when were the musketeers fat ? i will give the movie this much , and that is that its main reason for being ( its " raison-d'etre " , as the french would say ) , its fight sequences , do come through despite the lack of their numbers in the film .
 and can anyone please tell me how catherine deneuve got her name placed at the top of this film's credits ? hullo ? the film is called the musketeer and stars a dude name justin chambers  deneuve is barely in this movie ! ugh , just another small thing that annoyed me about this trash .
 cage is legendary retired car thief , memphis raines ( don't you love cute movie names ) , who must call upon his time worn skills to save his thick-headed brother ( ribisi ) from being killed .
 shadowing memphis is an old law enforcement foe ( lindo ) who's looking to send memphis away  lindo projects a warm hearted , but tightly focused detective that almost transcends the material .
 will he catch him ? there's old flame sway ( jolie ) , who had her heart broken by memphis years ago  monumentally underused jolie portrays an empty headed sexpot whose idea of sex revolves around cars and memphis .
 will they reconnect ? raines old mentor ( duvall ) has long since left the life of crime  duvall trots out his ornery , but sweet old codger outfit .
 the biggest waste of resources is vinnie jones , who plays a mute accomplice of memphis .
synopsis : in this movie , steven spielberg , one of today's finest directors , attempts to spice up the 1800s story of a long courtroom battle over the fate of prisoner cinque ( djimon hounsou ) - - a young angry man from sierra leone who was kidnapped into slavery - - and his fellow prisoners djimon hounsou and anthony hopkins turn in excellent performances .
lawyers baldwin and adams ( matthew mcconaughey and anthony hopkins ) must prove cinque and the others were captured into slavery , rather than born slaves , in order to get them out of prison as free men djimon hounsou and anthony hopkins turn in excellent performances .
lawyers baldwin and adams ( matthew mcconaughey and anthony hopkins ) must prove cinque and the others were captured into slavery , rather than born slaves , in order to get them out of prison as free men .
 dade later meets up with fellow hackers acid burn ( angelina jolie ) , cereal killer ( matthew lillard ) , lord nikon ( laurence mason ) , and the phantom phreak ( renoly santiago ) , who are basically trying to do what is next to impossible : hack the gibson computer and not get caught by the fbi .
 dade later meets up with fellow hackers acid burn ( angelina jolie ) , cereal killer ( matthew lillard ) , lord nikon ( laurence mason ) , and the phantom phreak ( renoly santiago ) , who are basically trying to do what is next to impossible : hack the gibson computer and not get caught by the fbi .
 dade later meets up with fellow hackers acid burn ( angelina jolie ) , cereal killer ( matthew lillard ) , lord nikon ( laurence mason ) , and the phantom phreak ( renoly santiago ) , who are basically trying to do what is next to impossible : hack the gibson computer and not get caught by the fbi .
 dade later meets up with fellow hackers acid burn ( angelina jolie ) , cereal killer ( matthew lillard ) , lord nikon ( laurence mason ) , and the phantom phreak ( renoly santiago ) , who are basically trying to do what is next to impossible : hack the gibson computer and not get caught by the fbi .
 more specifically , it follows the exploits of dade murphy , a young computer hacker played by jonny lee miller  miller should be extremely thankful for the film trainspotting , because if it were not for that , who knows where his career would be now after hackers .
jack vincennes ( spacey ) is the cop who is more concerned on busting with fame and stardom ala hollywood style , concentrating heavily on work which will attract him media attention surprisingly , though spacey did a very convincing job as the street-wise vincennes , the movie was carried mostly by the two rather `unknowns' , pearce and crowe .
there is also the young hot-shot rookie , ed exley ( pearce ) , fresh out of the academy and all-out to carve a name for himself in the footsteps of his legendary cop father surprisingly , though spacey did a very convincing job as the street-wise vincennes , the movie was carried mostly by the two rather `unknowns' , pearce and crowe pearce's exley is cool and calculative in his actions and there is a slight hint of val kilmer in his appearance .
the tough and unnerving bud white ( crowe ) , a cop who believes in justice , the swift and violent way surprisingly , though spacey did a very convincing job as the street-wise vincennes , the movie was carried mostly by the two rather `unknowns' , pearce and crowe crowe's bud white is the most impressive of all ; head-strong and temperamental , he should obtain some sort of recognition for his work here .
well , i know that stallone is 50 years old now , but in daylight he doesn't look it !daylight is a great disaster movie if you've seen cliffhanger , you'll know stallone's character already a dozen or so people survive the collapses and the incinerating fireball ( and what a fire ball it was ! )stallone , a former emergency medical service man , is chauffeuring a rich couple around , when they reach the outside of the tunnel , before the explosion .
synopsis : leonard shelby ( pearce ) is a former insurance investigator on the trail of the man who killed his wife .
pierce is terrific as the troubled leonard ; moss shows great range as enigmatic natalie ; and pantoliano's teddy achieves a splendidly affable yet sinister quality .
pierce is terrific as the troubled leonard ; moss shows great range as enigmatic natalie ; and pantoliano's teddy achieves a splendidly affable yet sinister quality .
 claudia ( lauren holly ) is a small town waitress who is feeling stifled by her life  he walks into the room and lauren holly swoons  lauren holly does what she can with her central character .
 her boyfriend , michael ( jon bon jovi ) , is broke and in a dead end job .
edward burns tackles his third picture with no looking back , and like his previous two , it is a working-class relationship picture  enter charlie ( edward burns ) , claudia's old flame  edward burns makes a misstep by casting himself in the crucial role as the egomaniacal old flame .
 braxton ( chris penn ) and kennesaw ( michael rooker ) are two cops investigating the brutal murder of a prostitute ( renee zellweger ) .
 braxton ( chris penn ) and kennesaw ( michael rooker ) are two cops investigating the brutal murder of a prostitute ( renee zellweger ) .
 braxton ( chris penn ) and kennesaw ( michael rooker ) are two cops investigating the brutal murder of a prostitute ( renee zellweger ) .
 their lone suspect is wayland ( tim roth ) , a wealthy young man whose phone number was found in the hooker's pocket .
 braxton is a gambling addict in deep to mook ( ellen burstyn ) , a local bookie .
 this time , keanu reeves plays an elusive homicidal maniac who engages in a gruesome ticking-clock cat-and-mouse game with james spader , a burnt-out fbi agent who has suffered a traumatic nervous breakdown after too many years on the job with the lapd  to taunt spader , who has relocated to chicago , reeves packs up his trusty piano wire and moves too  " writers david elliot , clay ayers and darcy meyers , along with first-time director joe charbanic ( helmer of music videos for reeves' band dogstar ) , dwell on the warped thrill of the methodology and the chase , revealing , early on , exactly whodunit since the killer says he and the cop " need each other to give meaning to our lives  " plus , as reeves explains , " we're all stacked right on top of each other , but we don't notice each other any more  james spader's acting technique can be described as 'wooden deadpan' while keanu reeves maintains his perpetually monotone 'dude' persona which sometimes works , sometimes doesn't .
 this time , keanu reeves plays an elusive homicidal maniac who engages in a gruesome ticking-clock cat-and-mouse game with james spader , a burnt-out fbi agent who has suffered a traumatic nervous breakdown after too many years on the job with the lapd  to taunt spader , who has relocated to chicago , reeves packs up his trusty piano wire and moves too  before long , he starts mailing photographs of the lonely , unsuspecting young women who are his intended windy city victims , challenging spader , along with the chicago police department , to stop him within 24 hours before he strikes again  in the midst of this murderous frenzy , there's spader's psychologist , played by marisa tomei , who is even less convincing as a medical professional than jennifer lopez in " the cell  james spader's acting technique can be described as 'wooden deadpan' while keanu reeves maintains his perpetually monotone 'dude' persona which sometimes works , sometimes doesn't  chris ellis , as spader's self-important colleague , is the only cast member who manages to be convincing .
 in the midst of this murderous frenzy , there's spader's psychologist , played by marisa tomei , who is even less convincing as a medical professional than jennifer lopez in " the cell .
 in the midst of this murderous frenzy , there's spader's psychologist , played by marisa tomei , who is even less convincing as a medical professional than jennifer lopez in " the cell .
 chris ellis , as spader's self-important colleague , is the only cast member who manages to be convincing .
the ultimate punishment comes from mom ( catherine o'hara ) who sends him up to the spare bedroom in the attic for the night .
 " being john malkovich " is the type of film we need to see more john cusack plays a puppeteer trying to make it to the big time when cusack finally realizes he needs to get a job , he finds an ad for a filing clerk it's there that he discovers a secret portal that leads to being john malkovich for 15 minutes at a time meanwhile , cusack meets a business partner ( catherine keener ) , in which he falls madly in love with her the whole portal thing , isn't just a toy , in fact , it becomes cusack's dream i don't want to give away too much , but cusack becomes too attached with his discovery john cusack has finally been given a chance to prove his ability , and he does it well john malkovich himself continues to creep out people with his eerie facial expressions and tone of voice  " being john malkovich " isn't an excellent film , but it is definitly entertaining and will eaisly become a cult favorite .
his wife ( cameron diaz ) supports the both of them by working at a petstore , which explains the obscure pets they keep in their apartment cameron diaz was her usual charming self , although i felt that part was wrong for her , but she pulled it off .
meanwhile , cusack meets a business partner ( catherine keener ) , in which he falls madly in love with her .
broderick and sheedy are just fine as the young teenagers ( although her interest in david remains a mystery ) .
broderick and sheedy are just fine as the young teenagers ( although her interest in david remains a mystery ) .
their officers , particularly general janssens ( rudi delhem ) in the force publique , the congo's army , caused rebellions , undermining lumumba , who was outraged at the rape and murder of belgian nationals .
with unrest building , moise tshombe ( pascal nzonzi ) and the province of katanga , which contained 70 percent of the country's resources , proclaimed secession .
lumumba replaced janssens , making mobutu a colonel , and went on a pacificationtour with congolese president joseph kasa vubu ( maka kotto ) , but it was too late .
he's served well , though , by his casting of ebouaney in the title role ebouaney is dynamic , radiating his character's fierce passion for his people and his country lumumba's intelligence and ability to strategize , even as he's cornered by insurmountable odds , are given life by ebouaney  " lumumba " is a story that deserves to be told and ebouaney's performance makes the tragedy personally felt .
the story follows a promotional visit to rome by famous american mystery novelist peter neal ( anthony franciosa ) where he discovers that a serial killer is on the loose inspired by his latest book " tenebrae " the film benefits enormously from a fine central performance by franciosa the story owes us a better understanding of franciosa's mind , his concealed madness and his sudden murderous rampage .
there's mckellar , who plays a man who just wants to be alone when the moment occurs , but keeps getting interrupted by a woman ( sandra oh ) in search of her husband these people all felt real to me , especially the character played by sandra oh .
in doing this , mckellar ( who also wrote and directed the film ) seems to be trying to transcend the genre mckellar is largely successful in his attempt to rise above his material there's mckellar , who plays a man who just wants to be alone when the moment occurs , but keeps getting interrupted by a woman ( sandra oh ) in search of her husband finally , there's mckellar's friend , played by callum keith rennie , a man who has spent his final months trying out every sexual perversion you can think of mckellar has crafted a gang of the some of the most interesting characters i've seen in a film in months but for me , the biggest surprise in the movie is mckellar his insistence to be alone , much to the dismay of his parents , is something that most people would find difficult to understand , but as played by mckellar , we can understand his reasons mckellar gives a brilliant performance , and i hope he alternates between directing and acting i appreciate the fact that mckellar didn't want the material to rule the film , and that he wanted the movie to be more of a study in human behavious .
her husband , played by david cronenberg , is spending the day working at the gas company , informing people that they will attempt to keep providing gas right up until the end .
finally , there's mckellar's friend , played by callum keith rennie , a man who has spent his final months trying out every sexual perversion you can think of .
sid james plays the head of a gang of crooks intent on stealing contraceptive pills from the local maternity hospital and selling them off to make a profit , kenneth williams is sir bernard cutting , head of the hospital but also a hypochondriac , hattie jacques re-takes her role as matron , and charles hawtrey is the psychiatrist dr sid james' gang including cyril his son ( kenneth cope ) try to find out where the pills are by getting cyril to dress up as a nurse and live in at the nurses home williams is , as usual , on top form , but sid james isn't given a very good part in this movie and i would forgive anyone to forget that he was in the movie at all by not making use of sid james and barbara windsor's talent to full effect , the film seems to flounder , but it certainly makes up for it with it's good storyline and it's other appealing characters .
sid james plays the head of a gang of crooks intent on stealing contraceptive pills from the local maternity hospital and selling them off to make a profit , kenneth williams is sir bernard cutting , head of the hospital but also a hypochondriac , hattie jacques re-takes her role as matron , and charles hawtrey is the psychiatrist dr this time , williams is after matron ( jacques ) when he needs to prove himself that he is a man after visiting dr there are great cameos from joan sims , an expectant mother who is many weeks overdue and is eating constantly in every scene , and from kenneth connor as the expectant father who still thinks he's at work ( at the railway station ) sid james' gang including cyril his son ( kenneth cope ) try to find out where the pills are by getting cyril to dress up as a nurse and live in at the nurses home williams is , as usual , on top form , but sid james isn't given a very good part in this movie and i would forgive anyone to forget that he was in the movie at all .
sid james plays the head of a gang of crooks intent on stealing contraceptive pills from the local maternity hospital and selling them off to make a profit , kenneth williams is sir bernard cutting , head of the hospital but also a hypochondriac , hattie jacques re-takes her role as matron , and charles hawtrey is the psychiatrist dr this time , williams is after matron ( jacques ) when he needs to prove himself that he is a man after visiting dr there are good performances by hattie jacques as the matron , however her character seems a little more subdued and quieter than her previous 'matron's' .
sid james plays the head of a gang of crooks intent on stealing contraceptive pills from the local maternity hospital and selling them off to make a profit , kenneth williams is sir bernard cutting , head of the hospital but also a hypochondriac , hattie jacques re-takes her role as matron , and charles hawtrey is the psychiatrist dr the doctor ( hawtrey ) is sworn to secrecy : - " i assure you , that anything you say to me today will go in one ear and straight out of the other ! "bernard thinks he is having a sex change and needs to prove himself the same does not go for charles hawtrey , for although he only first appears in the movie after 30 minutes gone and has scarce screen time , he seems to steal every scene he is in .
there are great cameos from joan sims , an expectant mother who is many weeks overdue and is eating constantly in every scene , and from kenneth connor as the expectant father who still thinks he's at work ( at the railway station ) .
with 11 days to go until the election , the president ( who we never see ) calls in political dirty-tricks artist robert deniro to distract attention from a burgeoning sex scandal deniro enlists hollywood producer dustin hoffman to produce a " pageant " , a phony war against albania , fought on the blue screens of hollywood and the recording studios of nashville , with woody harrelson as the reluctant , psychotic hero deniro and hoffman are " stealing " the election , so to speak , and the movie is more about how they do it -- and the fun they have doing it -- than anything else  )and because we're so utterly , predictably stupid , hollywood knows that a certain percentage of us will go see hard rain or magoo , washington knows that we won't notice a few million dollars spent here and there on porno art grants and cigar subsidies -- and deniro's character knows that american geography skills are so weak that we won't be able to locate albania on the map deniro is playing a variation on his al capone character from the untouchables , without any of the violent rages .
deniro enlists hollywood producer dustin hoffman to produce a " pageant " , a phony war against albania , fought on the blue screens of hollywood and the recording studios of nashville , with woody harrelson as the reluctant , psychotic hero deniro and hoffman are " stealing " the election , so to speak , and the movie is more about how they do it -- and the fun they have doing it -- than anything else hoffman , on the other hand , is giddy , exuberant and joyous insiders note that he's basing his character on some powerful-but-anonymous producer -- which may or may not be true , but hoffman still exudes the kind of lets-put-on-a-show electricity that you figure a producer needs to have .
deniro enlists hollywood producer dustin hoffman to produce a " pageant " , a phony war against albania , fought on the blue screens of hollywood and the recording studios of nashville , with woody harrelson as the reluctant , psychotic hero woody harrelson has a brief , but memorable part as the overmedicated " hero " of the albanian conflict .
nor is it a hard-edged cynical look at the manner in which a morally-deprived , ethically challenged baby-boomer connives his sleazy way into the white house ( like primary colors -- and yes , i am a little disappointed in the way the last two elections turned out , thanks for asking ) anne heche , is dead-bang-on in her portrayal of a political press aide -- cool and composed on the outside , panicked and frenzied on the outside .
 nelson , as the opposition candidate , and the ever-reliable william h  macy , as a wacky cia agent , are given surprisingly short shrift .
 " starring jet li , bridget fonda , tch ? ky karyo , burt kwouk  kiss of the dragon , jet li's second consecutive american misfire , plays like one big miscalculation , and fails even as the most rudimentary entertainment  now before i start getting e-mails angrily touting the genius of jet li , let me explain myself .
it's now the anniversary of the slayings of julie james' ( jennifer love hewitt ) best friends  but was this contest too good to be true ? the resort is filled with a skeleton staff that seemed like love boat rejects .
 julie and one other , ray ( freddie prinze jr .
 needing some desparate rest and relaxation , she is elated to learn that her college roommate , karla ( brandy ) , has won a trip for four to a secluded tropical island .
 accompanying these two girls are karla's overbearing boyfriend , tyrell ( mehki phifer ) and a potential beau for julie .
after enduring mariah carey's film debut , glitter , i'm reminded of a bit from chris rock's bigger and blacker  " to that i say , you can give mariah carey a movie , but that certainly don't mean it should be done  meant to be partially autobiographical , carey plays billie frank , a young singer in new york who struggles to overcome a rough childhood and abandonment by her alcoholic mother  instead , the audience at my screening tended to laugh loudest during mariah's most dramatic scenes  mariah is primarily seen with a wide-eyed deer-in-the-headlights look frozen on her face  so much of the dialogue is so hackneyed and watered down for carey's virginal target audience that it's probably impossible for any actor to pull it off with aplomb  and , it pains me that mariah carey -- with her ego and sanity in such fragile condition these days , as evidenced by her multiple hospital stays -- will have to suffer through all the negative reviews she's likely to get .
after enduring mariah carey's film debut , glitter , i'm reminded of a bit from chris rock's bigger and blacker  in response to women saying that they can raise a child without a man , rock says , " you can drive a car with your feet , but that don't mean it should be done .
 " lucky 7 " ( max beesley playing a bad mix of puff daddy and robert de niro ) , hears her sing on a track , and decides to make her a star .
roman emperor marcus aurelius ( richard harris ) chooses his trusted general maximus ( russell crowe ) as his successor .
roman emperor marcus aurelius ( richard harris ) chooses his trusted general maximus ( russell crowe ) as his successor russell crowe should have become a major star after his gleefully over the top role as a computer generated serial killer in 1995's virtuosity from here on moviegoers should now be able to say , " let's go see the new russell crowe movie " .
however the emperor's evil son commodus ( joaquin phoenix ) murders his father before the announcement can be made , and maximus ( as well as his family ) is sentenced to be executed joaquin phoenix does a very effective job of making commodus a person and not just a cartoon character ( which could have easily happened ) commodus is conniving , sneaky and whiny , but phoenix never lets the character get silly .
maximus is able to escape his executioners , but is later captured and sold as a slave to proximo ( oliver reed ) oliver reed died during the filming of gladiator , and it's a huge loss to the acting world i've always been fascinated with reed reed's death presented the filmmakers with an obvious problem , as he still had scenes to be completed rather than recast the role ( and end up reshooting a great deal of footage ) , a digital version of oliver reed was created at a reported cost of 2 million dollars ironically , that was probably more money than reed ever earned for a single film .
 get carter -- the latest masterpiece from uber-thespian sylvester stallone -- is a prime example of large and in charge 80's action stars trying to fit back into action roles they have long since outgrown .
 stallone plays frank carter , a vegas bruiser for a loan shark ( played with amazing gusto by the uncredited voice of actor tom sizemore ) .
 he talks tough with his brother's wife , lends a helping had to his brother's daughter doreen ( rachel leigh cook ) , and walks around seattle in the pouring rain dressed like a lost member of the rat pack with a really bad goatee .
 carter finds out that his brother was involved in some bad stuff with a slimy porn king played by ultra-cool , mcqueen-esque mickey rourke , a multi-millionaire computer geek ( alan cumming ) , and a strange foreign guy ( michael caine ) who speaks in riddles and talks tough  the biggest surprise in get carter is that the best job done in the film is by the versatile mickey rourke .
 carter finds out that his brother was involved in some bad stuff with a slimy porn king played by ultra-cool , mcqueen-esque mickey rourke , a multi-millionaire computer geek ( alan cumming ) , and a strange foreign guy ( michael caine ) who speaks in riddles and talks tough .
but i do know this : ewan mcgregor , whom i had never had the pleasure of watching , definitely charmed me the audience may find it difficult to care about her , thus discouraging the hopes of seeing her unite with mcgregor after we are immediately sucked into caring about and identifying with him .
he was great !cameron diaz's character was uneven and a bit hard to grasp .
 containing a good cast but awful acting ; an interesting premise but terrible execution , ron shelton ( white men can't jump ) gives us a rocky story with not one rocky but two  writer/director ron shelton clearly spent much time orchestrating the fight sequence as it is well photographed , well-choreographed , well-edited , and well-performed .
 1 is vince boudreau ( woody harrelson , edtv ) , a bald , tattooed , newly converted christian , whose idea of christianity is not using the name of christ as a curse word  harrelson and mr  harrelson is uncomfortably awkward , apparently never having gotten a firm handle on vince .
 2 is caesar dominguez ( antonio banderas , the 13th warrior ) , best friend of vince who is currently dating vince's ex-girlfriend , grace  banderas have provided us with stunning characterizations in the past , not that we'd know it from their work here  banderas is uncharacteristically non-charismatic as caesar .
 tom sizemore ( saving private ryan ) , robert wagner ( austin powers ii : the spy who shagged me ) , and richard masur ( fire down below ) are crooked promoters , lucy liu ( payback ) is a sex-starved hitchhiker looking for a good time , and lolita davidovich ( gods and monsters ) , is the shared girlfriend who can't make her mind up which boxer she prefers .
 starring : wesley snipes , anne archer , michael chaykin , donald sutherland , marie matiko  running time : 117 minutes directed by : christian duguay i've never fully understood wesley snipes's career  wesley snipes plays a james bondish type secret agent working for the u  and she has hired snipes to track down the killer  well snipes is mistakenly framed as the killer , and is now an outlaw , kidnapping a chinese woman with him , and having her help him along the way  wesley snipes isn't one of my favorite actors because of the fact that the character he plays in every movie is the same character he plays in the movie before  the only good role snipes has really had was in 1998's " blade "  if you really want to see a good version of " the art of war " , rent the wesley snipes and sean connery action vehicle of the same kind " rising sun " , it isn't a great film either , but at least it's better than this .
 starring : wesley snipes , anne archer , michael chaykin , donald sutherland , marie matiko  anne archer plays his " boss " type person of the u  anne archer who is usually good in her roles , turns in a horrible job here .
 starring : wesley snipes , anne archer , michael chaykin , donald sutherland , marie matiko .
 starring : wesley snipes , anne archer , michael chaykin , donald sutherland , marie matiko  even donald sutherland as a co-star can't save this movie from being a bust .
 ) the lady is helen , played by the stunning jean tripplehorn , who isn't given a chance to be stunning , or even interesting , by the mediocre and unimaginative script  ) i'm quite fond of tina majorino's previous work , very impressed by jean tripplehorn's past accomplishments , and still speechless over costner's dances with wolves .
 the child enola , played by tina majorino , is living proof that a child actor need not be a bad thing to have in a movie ; she outshines her material all the way through  ) i'm quite fond of tina majorino's previous work , very impressed by jean tripplehorn's past accomplishments , and still speechless over costner's dances with wolves .
 played with typical self-lampooning , rug-chewing histrionics by dennis hopper , " deacon " is the only thing in the movie that's close to amusing .
 the star ( and a co-producer ) is kevin costner  ) i'm quite fond of tina majorino's previous work , very impressed by jean tripplehorn's past accomplishments , and still speechless over costner's dances with wolves .
the project they're busy with is the wedding quilt for hy's granddaughter , finn ( winona ryder ) , who has just become engaged from winona ryder , ann bancroft , ellen burstyn , and maya angelou to minor players like rip torn , claire danes , and kate capshaw , this film is overflowing with realized talent .
the " quilting bee " consists of seven members : sisters gladys ( ann bancroft ) and hy ( ellen burstyn ) ; sophia ( lois smith ) , a woman known for frightening children ; emma ( jean simmons ) , the timid wife of a perpetually unfaithful man ; constance ( kate nelligan ) , who has been having an affair with emma's husband ; anna ( maya angelou ) , the leader of the group ; and marianna ( alfre woodard ) , anna's daughter from winona ryder , ann bancroft , ellen burstyn , and maya angelou to minor players like rip torn , claire danes , and kate capshaw , this film is overflowing with realized talent there are other episodes as well : the love of anna's life , marianna's soul mate , and a look at the reasons why constance entered into an affair with her friend's husband .
the " quilting bee " consists of seven members : sisters gladys ( ann bancroft ) and hy ( ellen burstyn ) ; sophia ( lois smith ) , a woman known for frightening children ; emma ( jean simmons ) , the timid wife of a perpetually unfaithful man ; constance ( kate nelligan ) , who has been having an affair with emma's husband ; anna ( maya angelou ) , the leader of the group ; and marianna ( alfre woodard ) , anna's daughter from winona ryder , ann bancroft , ellen burstyn , and maya angelou to minor players like rip torn , claire danes , and kate capshaw , this film is overflowing with realized talent .
the " quilting bee " consists of seven members : sisters gladys ( ann bancroft ) and hy ( ellen burstyn ) ; sophia ( lois smith ) , a woman known for frightening children ; emma ( jean simmons ) , the timid wife of a perpetually unfaithful man ; constance ( kate nelligan ) , who has been having an affair with emma's husband ; anna ( maya angelou ) , the leader of the group ; and marianna ( alfre woodard ) , anna's daughter from winona ryder , ann bancroft , ellen burstyn , and maya angelou to minor players like rip torn , claire danes , and kate capshaw , this film is overflowing with realized talent .
from winona ryder , ann bancroft , ellen burstyn , and maya angelou to minor players like rip torn , claire danes , and kate capshaw , this film is overflowing with realized talent .
 if you can't make it zany , cut it ! " the latter is the only explanation i can come up with for the absence of the thoroughly charming michelle trachtenberg for most of the movie  michelle ( who plays penny , gadget's niece ) shines in every scene she's in , but unfortunately she only gets about nine minutes of screen time  michelle trachtenberg was an excellent choice for the penny character .
 dabney coleman's comedic talents are utterly wasted as chief quimby .
 he is thoroughly upstaged by cheri oteri as the " gidget bitch from hell " town mayor  oteri's overly enthusiastic and continually self-congratulatory speech patterns and mannerisms were so much like portland , oregon's own manic mayor vera katz that i had to wonder if the studio wasn't poking fun at our fair town .
 rupert everett is entertaining as the maniacle claw .
 joely fisher does fine as the zany scientist and even better as the zany carbon copy of herself .
set in the 1940's , the film tells the story of a unique young man named homer wells ( tobey maguire , ride with the devil ) tobey maguire is well cast yet again as an inherently good man who is seeking answers to life's questions .
 wilbur larch ( michael caine , little voice ) , father figure to the orphans of st michael caine is , in a word , brilliant as the caring caretaker of these orphans , many of whom he helped to bring into the world  caine manages to communicate the love and commitment larch has towards these children without becoming maudlin or saccharine .
thus , homer begins his worldly instruction , with new friend candy kendall ( charlize theron , the astronaut's wife ) a willing tutor .
delroy lindo ( a life less ordinary ) has many powerful moments as mr .
one of the first films of 1999 is this mtv pictures release which marks the first leading feature role for james van der beek , the star of the wb's runaway hit dawson's creek  set in west cannan , texas , the film examines the small town obsession with high school football through the eyes of second string quarterback john " mox " moxon ( van der beek )  the star quarterback , lance harbor ( paul walker ) , is a handsome , blonde , hero who has his own billboard in his front yard and dates the sexy head cheerleader , darcy ( ali larter )  when lance is seriously injured , mox gets his chance to shine and he runs with it , undermining kilmer with his unusual playing strategies  van der beek does a decent job of carrying his first film although a silly accent trips him up sometimes  scott ( son of james ) caan has some lively moments as tweeder , the team's wild man .
 coach bud kilmer ( jon voight ) has been around so long there is actually a bronze statue commemorating him  voight is a terror as he chews up every single piece of scenery and spits it out .
 the star quarterback , lance harbor ( paul walker ) , is a handsome , blonde , hero who has his own billboard in his front yard and dates the sexy head cheerleader , darcy ( ali larter )  on the positive side , walker is a charismatic actor who is due for a breakout role following this and his supporting turn in pleasantville ( 1998 ) .
 the star quarterback , lance harbor ( paul walker ) , is a handsome , blonde , hero who has his own billboard in his front yard and dates the sexy head cheerleader , darcy ( ali larter )  larter , as a gorgeous seductress looking for a one way ticket out of texas , gets to show off the film's most interesting costumes , including a very eye-opening " whipped cream bikini  there's an ok soundtrack featuring music from collective soul , foo fighters , green day and aaliyah but it's not as impressive as one would expect from a mtv film .
 coach bud kilmer ( jon voight ) has been around so long there is actually a bronze statue commemorating him  the star quarterback , lance harbor ( paul walker ) , is a handsome , blonde , hero who has his own billboard in his front yard and dates the sexy head cheerleader , darcy ( ali larter )  also on the team are an enormous guy ( ron lester ) with some health problems and the token african-american team member ( eliel swinton ) whose only real dialogue scene deals directly with the color of his skin .
 " ray liotta's character was making out with his secretary when his new wife knocked on the door of his office  ray liotta manages to squeeze a tiny bit of humanity and humor into his walking clich ? , but only a bit .
 in addition to liotta and hewitt , the cast includes sigourney weaver , gene hackman , jason lee , nora dunn and anne bancroft  sigourney weaver and jennifer love hewitt throw themselves into their parts , but have nowhere to go with the metallic characters .
 in addition to liotta and hewitt , the cast includes sigourney weaver , gene hackman , jason lee , nora dunn and anne bancroft  poor jason lee is stuck in the ingenue role and the normally charismatic actor comes off as merely bland .
  " heartbreakers " reeks of that stagnant mentality , from its lingering shots of jennifer love hewitt's vah-vah-voom breasts to its leaden screenplay , which paints women as haughty schemers and men as drooling buffoons too sex-obsessed to realize they are being manipulated  sigourney weaver and jennifer love hewitt throw themselves into their parts , but have nowhere to go with the metallic characters .
 in addition to liotta and hewitt , the cast includes sigourney weaver , gene hackman , jason lee , nora dunn and anne bancroft  gene hackman is utterly wasted in a one-note , one-joke part that has him doing nothing but smoking , coughing and waxing rhapsodic about smoking and sex .
deft direction by robert redford and keen performances by ralph fiennes , john turturro and rob morrow dovetail perfectly with the carefully honed script .
deft direction by robert redford and keen performances by ralph fiennes , john turturro and rob morrow dovetail perfectly with the carefully honed script .
deft direction by robert redford and keen performances by ralph fiennes , john turturro and rob morrow dovetail perfectly with the carefully honed script .
 " finally , there is occasional commentary from bela lugosi as a sort of omniscient being who seems to inhabit a frankenstein-style laboratory , delivering pointless lines such as , " people   " pull the string ! pull the string ! " announces an alarmed lugosi as stock footage of buffalo appears  there is another crash of lightning before lugosi returns , this time warning us , " beware .
martha fiennes' debut feature is ( quite literally ) filmed poetry ( it's based on an epic russian poem by alexander pushkin ) , a profound study of regret , of how we confuse shame with guilt when we first meet eugene onegin ( ralph , acting for his sister ; another brother , magnus , composed the score ) , a philandering aristocrat from st what is most amazing about ralph fiennes' performance is his subtle physical transformation from dashing snob to miserly grouch  fiennes and ms _onegin_ could have added up to little more than a distinguished episode of " masterpiece theater " , even with its current cast of thoroughbreds intact , were martha fiennes not at the helm  )martha fiennes has a clear command of cinema , and her spare , often painfully human visual presentation of " yevgeny onegin " is arguably the most lucid translation of pushkin's difficult text yet  fiennes may be the most exciting female presence behind a camera since jane campion .
up until about a year ago , john travolta's career consisted of those " look who's talking " movies ( notice how they never called them look who's talented ) and the 1991 bomb shout ( which was bad enough to make most people scream ) .
he goes to collect some of the mafia's money from a b-grade director ( gene hackman ) and suddenly finds out he wants out of the mob game and into the movie game .
palmer is determined to get hackman's next project made , so he sets out to convince big star martin weir ( danny devito ) to star in the movie , bringing along down-and-out horror actress karen flores ( rene russo ) , who has already had affairs with hackman and devito .
palmer is determined to get hackman's next project made , so he sets out to convince big star martin weir ( danny devito ) to star in the movie , bringing along down-and-out horror actress karen flores ( rene russo ) , who has already had affairs with hackman and devito .
based on the 1960s tv series that i had never seen or heard of before this movie ( be happy , i won't bore you with any lame and unnecessary comparisons ) , this film allows will smith to take a third stab at the independence day weekend box-office , after scoring huge successes with men in black ( 7/10 ) , directed by the same man who controlled this one , and independence day ( 6/10 )  or could it be that we have come to expect so much more from will smith and hollywood big-budget movies , that we cannot help but evaluate them on a scale onto their own ? naaaaaaah ! a bad movie is a bad movie  little known facts about this film and its stars : will smith has starred in two of the ten all-time top grossing films worldwide : 1997's summer blockbuster men in black ( 7/10 ) , for which he also recorded the grammy-winning title song , and 1996's independence day ( 6/10 ) .
 i also did not tense up or particularly enjoy any of its unenergetic action sequences which provided me with little more than a few minutes time to think back to the lovely salma hayek scenes  on a positive note , i could honestly say that i did very much enjoy the lovely performance by the adorable salma hayek , who seemed underused ( in my humble opinion ) , and lit up every bubbly scene that she was hardly in  then again , there is that one scene with the lovely salma hayek tied up in a cage  salma hayek gave up a successful career as a major television star in latin america and moved to the united states to start over , even though she spoke no english .
 kevin kline is a graduate of the juilliard school of drama , and has been married to the cute-as-a-button actress phoebe cates since 1989 .
 when you consider that this film is a part-comedy , that's not a very good sign  when you consider that the other " part " of this film is geared as an action/adventure , i would say that this another negative sign  and when you consider that the first hour of the film was boring and a little slow , the story-line tired , reminiscent of swiss cheese and uninvolving , and the special effects interesting but worth very little inside a plot filled with lame one-liners , weak characterizations and an anti-climactic end , you pretty much have the gist of my impression of this " big " summer blockbuster  on a positive note , i could honestly say that i did very much enjoy the lovely performance by the adorable salma hayek , who seemed underused ( in my humble opinion ) , and lit up every bubbly scene that she was hardly in  smith and kline were static at best , the plot full of holes , and the score insignificant and derivative of a dozen others  she made her feature film debut as an actress with a small role in allison anders' mi vida loca ( no , not the rickie martin video ! ) and played her first starring role in robert rodriguez's desperado opposite antonio banderas  another is dutch-born frederique van der wal , who is one of the world's most recognized supermodels , having graced the cover of cosmopolitan numerous times , as well as harper's bazaar , vogue and mademoiselle .
warren beatty returns to the screens in the funniest , craziest and hard hitting movie in his career and seeing warren beatty have fun is a rare sight indeed .
halle berry is fine , and sexy , as the intellectual nina , who comes to like the senator .
also popping up in the supporting cast is paul sorvino wit h a strange accent , laurie metcalf as the exact same characters she's also played , and christine baranski of cybill fame as bullworths wife , who all contribute to the fun .
also popping up in the supporting cast is paul sorvino wit h a strange accent , laurie metcalf as the exact same characters she's also played , and christine baranski of cybill fame as bullworths wife , who all contribute to the fun .
also popping up in the supporting cast is paul sorvino wit h a strange accent , laurie metcalf as the exact same characters she's also played , and christine baranski of cybill fame as bullworths wife , who all contribute to the fun .
this japanese import tells the story of a middle-aged accountant named sugiyama ( koji yakusho ) whose mundane life is shaken up one night when he spots beautiful mai kishikawa ( tamiyo kusakari ) in the window of a dance school sugiyama's awakening is less overt , but koji yakusho does a wonderful job showing a transformation of small steps .
this japanese import tells the story of a middle-aged accountant named sugiyama ( koji yakusho ) whose mundane life is shaken up one night when he spots beautiful mai kishikawa ( tamiyo kusakari ) in the window of a dance school .
meanwhile , sugiyama's wife ( hideko hara ) becomes suspicious of his late wednesday nights , and sets a private detective on her husband's trail in shall we dance ? , writer/director masayuki suo dispenses with it in a matter of minutes , using it to set up later character interactions rather than letting it overwhelm the story with pratfalls suo gives his comedy the graceful movements of his subject matter , allowing the humor to flow from the characters rather than forcing it upon them .
 aoki ( naoto takenaka ) , a balding systems analyst who becomes a fiery latin lover when he dons a frizzy wig and begins to rumba .
 d'artagnan ( justin chambers ) is the vengeful son of a slain musketeer  the musketeer instead weighs itself down with a predictable and monotonous screenplay by gene quintano ( sudden death ) , horrible acting by stephen rea and tim roth , and the prosaic attempt of justin chambers ( the wedding planner ) to deliver his mousy self as a leader  chambers' d'artangnan isn't a musketeer -- he's a mouseketeer ! and hyam's use of candles and torches to light the grime and filth of 17th century paris are well-noted , but that's the only standout in an overall flat production .
 in paris , he meets the cunning cardinal richelieu ( stephen rea ) , who is trying to overthrow the king , and richelieu's man-in-black associate febre ( tim roth ) , the killer of his folks  one problem is that , in reality , most eastern films have taken their lead from western ones  ironically , there is awfully little swordplay or action in the film at all -- maybe ten minutes of swashbuckling spread over five scenes  the musketeer instead weighs itself down with a predictable and monotonous screenplay by gene quintano ( sudden death ) , horrible acting by stephen rea and tim roth , and the prosaic attempt of justin chambers ( the wedding planner ) to deliver his mousy self as a leader .
 this time out the nod to asia goes by way of france in the excruciating bland and lukewarm production of the musketeer , a version of dumas's the three musketeers  in paris , he meets the cunning cardinal richelieu ( stephen rea ) , who is trying to overthrow the king , and richelieu's man-in-black associate febre ( tim roth ) , the killer of his folks  the musketeer instead weighs itself down with a predictable and monotonous screenplay by gene quintano ( sudden death ) , horrible acting by stephen rea and tim roth , and the prosaic attempt of justin chambers ( the wedding planner ) to deliver his mousy self as a leader .
 he finds the musketeers in paris disbanded and drunk , so he rounds up aramis ( nick moran ) , athos ( jan gregor kremp ) and porthos ( steven spiers ) to free the musketeer's wrongfully imprisoned leader treville from the king's prison .
 he finds the musketeers in paris disbanded and drunk , so he rounds up aramis ( nick moran ) , athos ( jan gregor kremp ) and porthos ( steven spiers ) to free the musketeer's wrongfully imprisoned leader treville from the king's prison .
linda fiorentino disappeared off the radar after a deservedly heralded turn in the cable pic the last seduction , and her being cast as dogma's lead is nothing short of inexplicable .
bethany is joined on her road trip to the garden state by the " prophets " jay ( jason mewes ) and silent bob ( kevin smith , doing double-duty ) , the slacker minstrels who have appeared in all of smith's films thus far .
he is metatron ( alan rickman ) , the voice of god , and he needs her help : she must stop two fallen angels from entering a new jersey church-the fate of the universe depends on it .
at some point , rock drops naked out of the sky as rufus , the undocumented ( and very black ) " thirteenth apostle " , and offers his assistance , as does divine stripper serendipity ( salma hayek ) .
he is metatron ( alan rickman ) , the voice of god , and he needs her help : she must stop two fallen angels from entering a new jersey church-the fate of the universe depends on it .
as the film opens up , expectant unwed mother sally ( played by drew barrymore ) encounters her baby's father in a fast food drive-through window if there are any complaints , it is over drew barrymore's performance drew barrymore's accent tends to come and go ( luke wilson doesn't seem to have this problem ) .
home fries tells the tale of the relationship between sally and dorian ( played by luke wilson ) , a helicopter pilot who has a different kind of connection with sally drew barrymore's accent tends to come and go ( luke wilson doesn't seem to have this problem ) .
the father of sally's unborn child also happened to be a married man , whose wife is played by catherine o'hara .
rounding out the cast are jake busey as angus , dorian's overzealous brother and daryl mitchell as roy , dorian's trainer at the fast food restaurant .
rounding out the cast are jake busey as angus , dorian's overzealous brother and daryl mitchell as roy , dorian's trainer at the fast food restaurant .
will hunting ( matt damon ) is a natural genius .
it's a character study more than anything , and that's not surprising , considering it was written by two actors : damon and co-star ben affleck .
lambeau ( stellan skarsgard from breaking the waves ) , a math professor , learns that the janitor ( will ) is a genius with a special talent for advanced mathematics .
knowing that will is going to try to shred him too , sean ( robin williams ) agrees to take him on as a favor to lambeau and for the chance to meet this next einstein robin williams is excellent in this role .
the plot is complicated , but it goes something like this cousins is populated by a wide assortment of interesting characters and caricatures ted danson ( in his first starring film role ) finally gets to play a character with some depth and sensitivity .
as maria , isabella rossellini is a joy to watch ; she is shy , sensuous , and immensely alluring .
keith coogan , from adventures in babysitting , is wonderfully weird and eccentric as larry's rebellious son , mitch .
and finally , lloyd bridges in a tour de force performance is mitch's rambunctious grandfather ; he provides some of cousins' best lines and laughs .
there's something about ben stiller that makes him a popular choice among casting directors these days stiller currently has three projects in circulation , and what other actor can lay claim to that ?he's in " there's something about mary , " which i * still * haven't seen now there's " permanent midnight , " in which stiller plays another jerry , this one a heroin-addicted television writer , last name stahl there's also something about this industry that pushes bankable stars like stiller into doing drug-addiction pictures the minute they've proved themselves commercially  "as stahl , stiller contributes a commanding performance stiller , unshaven ( burroughs take note ) and with lots of mascara around the eyes , has stahl stumble through the film looking like a train wreck but , to his credit , never once pushes his pill-popping , needle-jabbing performance over the top the ubiquitous stiller is the reason to see " permanent midnight " ; a dark , comic , and strangely absorbing study of assisted living .
 to--again in the author's words-- " escape the drug scene " ( yeah , right ) ; why he entered into a convenient marriage with a british tv exec ( elizabeth hurley , so impossibly polite you'd swear her single profanity was dubbed ) ; and that he conceived a child in between his random hirings and firings .
janeane garofalo is wasted--and miscast--as a heavily-bespectacled hollywood talent agent who fails to get her hooks into the doped-up wordsmith , and that's stahl himself playing a jaded clinic counselor .
 'the elderly bank robber is henry ( paul newman ) , a famous criminal that was only recently caught `where the money is' does more to spotlight newman and fiorentino than it does to showcase a story about a nifty heist newman is the real joy of the film , adroitly showing that at age 75 , he's still really hot stuff .
worse , she's in a dead-end relationship with high-school sweetheart wayne ( dylan mcdermott ) .
 the film stars sandra bullock and nicole kidman as sally and gillian owens , two sisters whose family comes from a long line of witches , spanning back 200 years .
 the film stars sandra bullock and nicole kidman as sally and gillian owens , two sisters whose family comes from a long line of witches , spanning back 200 years .
 at the start , their parents die when they are still children , and they go to live with their two zany aunts ( stockard channing and dianne wiest ) .
 at the start , their parents die when they are still children , and they go to live with their two zany aunts ( stockard channing and dianne wiest ) .
 switch to the present day , gillian , who is the stronger , more rebellious sibling , leaves home , and meets up with a dark , abusive guy ( goran visjnic ) , while sally stays in their hometown , meets and falls in love with a sweet , caring man , has two children , and then is devastated when her husband is hit by a truck and killed ( come to think of it , she's not too devastated since she gets over it in about two minutes ) .
there is no revelation in un coeur en hiver in the traditional ; however , the film is incredibly successful in its passionate dramatization of a passion-denying protagonist , stephane ( daniel auteuil ) stephane ( daniel auteuil ) is a master violin maker i am not sure why berardinelli says , " at times it becomes difficult to determine whether stephane should be pitied or vilified , and it is to auteuil's credit that he manages to maintain this uncertainty .
even the relationship between he and his boss , maxime ( andre dussollier ) is a controlled , and almost manipulated association , highlighted by the fact that stephane permits maxime to win close squash matches .
camille kessler ( emmanuelle beart ) is a master violinist and the new love of maximes emmanuelle beart's personality is beautiful and needless to say , i must say that emmanuelle beart , herself , is beautiful .
 in fairness , elizabeth berkley is certainly worth seeing in the buff  everyone must know by now about the soft-core acts of copulation , especially the riotous romp between berkley and maclachlan in his pool  berkley may have a future in hollywood because she can dance and she has a great body  perhaps berkley could join their ranks and leave the real acting to pauly shore and cindy crawford  useless trivia--ironically , elizabeth berkley played virtuous and " holier than thou " jessie on the teeny-bopper tv show , " saved by the bell " , before breaking onto the big screen .
 i originally wrote this review for my college newspaper back in '95 , but i wanted to re-write it because not all retro reviews should be about the classics  maybe it's that , her body , which gets her into the big-time when the star of the " stardust hotel " , crystal connors ( gina gershon ) stops into the strip club ( it certainly isn't her brains or pleasant disposition ! ) .
 crystal requests a private lap dance for her boyfriend ( kyle maclachlan )  kyle maclachlan must have been promised a big pay-day or his standards have dipped since appearing in " blue velvet "  now ol' kyle can say that he acted in one of the worst of the '90s , too  everyone must know by now about the soft-core acts of copulation , especially the riotous romp between berkley and maclachlan in his pool .
 the sub-plot with a male dancer ( glenn plummer ) who claims to see talent in nomi is just a gratuitous opportunity to let her dance naked a little bit more  it sure ain't character development ! plummer also appeared in " speed " in '94 in a smaller , yet better role .
 with great film comedies under his belt from when harry met sally ? to the original city slickers , billy crystal has shown that he's more than the world's best oscar host .
 this one-joke movie's single idea is to place real-life basketball player gheorghe muresan , who stands seven and a half feet tall , into as many visually striking situations as possible  sammy ( crystal ) , an agent currently without clients , is rescued after a car accident by a sweet romanian giant named max ( muresan ) .
the message : a bunch of losers with loser names , mark renton ( ewan mcgregor ) , spud ( ewan bremner ) , sick boy ( jonny lee miller ) , tommy ( kevin mckidd ) , and begbie ( robert carlyle ) .
the message : a bunch of losers with loser names , mark renton ( ewan mcgregor ) , spud ( ewan bremner ) , sick boy ( jonny lee miller ) , tommy ( kevin mckidd ) , and begbie ( robert carlyle ) .
the message : a bunch of losers with loser names , mark renton ( ewan mcgregor ) , spud ( ewan bremner ) , sick boy ( jonny lee miller ) , tommy ( kevin mckidd ) , and begbie ( robert carlyle ) .
the message : a bunch of losers with loser names , mark renton ( ewan mcgregor ) , spud ( ewan bremner ) , sick boy ( jonny lee miller ) , tommy ( kevin mckidd ) , and begbie ( robert carlyle ) .
the message : a bunch of losers with loser names , mark renton ( ewan mcgregor ) , spud ( ewan bremner ) , sick boy ( jonny lee miller ) , tommy ( kevin mckidd ) , and begbie ( robert carlyle ) .
we're introduced to two jedi , the master qui-gon jinn ( neeson ) and his apprentice obi-wan kenobi ( mcgregor ) .
we're introduced to two jedi , the master qui-gon jinn ( neeson ) and his apprentice obi-wan kenobi ( mcgregor ) .
the two are acting as ambassadors of some sort in hopes of ending the obvious hostility between the federation and the planet's queen , amidala ( portman ) .
and here the most significant storyline is that involving the discovery of 10-year-old anakin skywalker ( lloyd ) , by qui-gon jinn and his introduction to the jedi council .
in particular , we got nick nolte as one hard-ass texas ranger , powers boothe as the drug kingpin , michael ironsides as the leader of the secret army , and rip torn as the local sheriff .
in particular , we got nick nolte as one hard-ass texas ranger , powers boothe as the drug kingpin , michael ironsides as the leader of the secret army , and rip torn as the local sheriff .
in other words , it's a walter hill film !with a john milius script !i always picture these guys getting together and producing a movie between arm-wrestling matches these films always contain male characters i have a very hard time identifying with , probably due to the likelihood that any meeting between them and me would result in my arm being ripped off and then my subsequent death by beating with said limb in particular , we got nick nolte as one hard-ass texas ranger , powers boothe as the drug kingpin , michael ironsides as the leader of the secret army , and rip torn as the local sheriff torn is the sympathetic figure of the group ; he smiles before shooting anyone the cinematography is excellent , the cast of characters is broad and has texture , the script is quite good , and the film lets you keep up with what's happening yourself , without spelling it out to you .
in particular , we got nick nolte as one hard-ass texas ranger , powers boothe as the drug kingpin , michael ironsides as the leader of the secret army , and rip torn as the local sheriff .
well , i've never seen jane fonda or meryl streep in a walter hill film , and at this rate , i doubt i ever will .
 the film follows the exploits of a young man , patrick ross ( justin lazard ) , whose sole focus is on cruising along the streets in order to pick up women , loitering in strip clubs , and generally trying to bed as many different ladies as he possibly can  lazard gives his character an appropriately shifty-eyed look , while returning vixen ms .
 and when he becomes aware of eve ( natasha henstridge ) , a half-human , half-alien clone of the monster from the first film being studied in a government lab , patrick's primary focus turns to her -- " if these two were to mate , the resulting pure strain of offspring would be unstoppable " warns dr  henstridge is actually given the opportunity to act in one scene ( and acquits herself nicely ) , but is mostly relegated to reprising her familiar role of parading about in skimpy clothing ( or none at all )  henstridge recently commented on how some female audiences have expressed appreciation for her character in the first entry of the species series , claiming that " she's so empowered .
 laura baker ( marg helgenberger , gamely reprising her role ) with admirable conviction  helgenberger do what they can with this goofy screenplay , but there's realistically only so much one can do with this script as a basis .
 it is the story of a farm a piglet named gordy ( voiced by garms ) , whose family has been taken away to " up north , " which we know means death .
 the only remotely interesting and likable character soon appears , a little girl named jinnie sue macallister ( young ) who sees gordy on the back of a truck and essentially steals him  we then cut to a huge social gathering and drop in on another young kid named hank royce ( roescher ) who is sad because his divorced mother is dating .
 we then cut to a huge social gathering and drop in on another young kid named hank royce ( roescher ) who is sad because his divorced mother is dating .
 and gordy ! of course there must be a villain , but even this villain ( donadio as sipes ) isn't that evil .
michelle yeoh imbues her character with depth , humanity and wisdom .
chow yon fat projects dignity and purity of heart .
zhang ziyi is a budding superstar .
cheng pei pei as the evil master and chang cheng as the bandit prince acquit themselves admirably .
cheng pei pei as the evil master and chang cheng as the bandit prince acquit themselves admirably .
 again , i see that military tactics in the future must have evolved at about the same pace as their weapons ! in the end , we see neil patrick " doogie howser " harris burst onto the scene in what could accurately be described as a nazi ss trenchcoat , hat , and gloves .
the biggest success of " amistad " is probably the characterization of cinque ( djimon hounsou ) , who emerges as the de facto leader of the kidnapped africans and struggles to communicate with baldwin ( matthew mcconaughey ) , the lawyer who represents them in court .
the biggest success of " amistad " is probably the characterization of cinque ( djimon hounsou ) , who emerges as the de facto leader of the kidnapped africans and struggles to communicate with baldwin ( matthew mcconaughey ) , the lawyer who represents them in court .
 actor bruce dern , who plays the throwaway role of the gatekeeper in this film , was once nominated for an oscar for best supporting actor for his role in coming home .
 don't get me wrong , catherine zeta was sweet window dressing ( despite my continued perception of her faint mustache-see entrapment ) , and owen wilson was good as the standard " comic relief " , but come on people , if you're going to have us sit through two hours in a theater with these folks , how 'bout giving them a little more than one-liners as dimension  little known facts about this film and its stars : goofy actor owen wilson co-scripted indie favorites rushmore ( 8/10 ) and bottle rocket with director wes anderson  his brother luke wilson is also an actor , who once dated drew barrymore for a year or so .
 a big star , catherine zeta-jones , hot of the heels of entrapment ( 6  don't get me wrong , catherine zeta was sweet window dressing ( despite my continued perception of her faint mustache-see entrapment ) , and owen wilson was good as the standard " comic relief " , but come on people , if you're going to have us sit through two hours in a theater with these folks , how 'bout giving them a little more than one-liners as dimension  see it for zeta-jones , or if you like special effects and scary movies that take forever to get going , and provide very little payback , otherwise skip it and check out the original or the ultimate movie about spooky homes from the netherworld , the shining  catherine zeta-jones is currently dating flabby ass actor michael " sex is my life " douglas .
 singer lisa loeb is listed in the credits as having portrayed the character of olivia morice , but i personally did not notice her .
 neeson was also wasted as the smart , british guy .
homer+s dad is played by chris cooper , a favorite actor of mine since _lone star_ .
when lovely teacher miss riley ( played by laura dern ) , suggests that he enters his findings into the national science fair , we know exactly who is going to win the revolution of modern technology has allowed for us to see society advanced at a rate far faster than any generation before us .
was it really only forty years ago , when sputnik was launched , and that before then , no satellites ever existed ?have we become so technologically advanced that we have forgotten that it was nearly two generations ago where people stood outside to breathlessly see a then-technological achievement , even though it was from the russians ?it sounds hokey , but when that scene occurs near the beginning of _october sky_ , i found myself caught up with the enthusiasm of homer hickam , played by jake gyllenhaal .
 i love ralph fiennes  we're talking ralph fiennes here , one of the best actors working today , one of the best actors * ever * .
 i love uma thurman .
 i love sean connery .
 hell , i'm even a big fan of jim broadbent and fiona shaw  they are to work together , under mother's orders ( mother is played by jolly jim broadbent , while his co-conspirator , father , is played by the equally-talented fiona shaw ) .
 hell , i'm even a big fan of jim broadbent and fiona shaw  they are to work together , under mother's orders ( mother is played by jolly jim broadbent , while his co-conspirator , father , is played by the equally-talented fiona shaw ) .
 '-sound advice from capone ( paul campbell ) to his squaddie ( or partner ) , floyd ( winston bell ) paul campbell , as the `loose cannon' capone , essays his role perfectly , displaying the right amount of menace and compassion at the right times .
 '-sound advice from capone ( paul campbell ) to his squaddie ( or partner ) , floyd ( winston bell ) paul campbell , as the `loose cannon' capone , essays his role perfectly , displaying the right amount of menace and compassion at the right times .
capone discovers that wonie has been smuggling guns inside shipments of charity supplies for the area churches and , much to his disappointment , also finds out his childhood friend ratty ( mark danvers ) has been helping him mark danvers evokes sympathy as ratty , the part-time gun smuggler who is also trying to help the community by building football fields and organizing block parties to bring people together palm pictures ( the company that released the offbeat , but entertaining six-string samurai ) is the company releasing the film and considering that their main focus is the dvd market , i can imagine that a disc will be available once the film has left theaters .
later he will learn that his name is john murdoch ( sewell ) , but for now he has no idea what's going on other than the fact something is not right .
we met inspector frank bumstead ( hurt ) , a quiet , unemotional , soft-spoken deadpan man who appears to have been on the trail of the killer for some time the main characters are all closely intertwined within the seemingly complex murder mystery which never actually happened , yet when they start to go through some of the expected emotions it comes off as distant , static and cold ( mediocre performances by hurt and connelly don't help either ) .
 schreber ( sutherland ) , a neurotic psychiatrist who claims to be john's doctor ; and emma murdoch ( connelly ) , a jazz singer dolled up to look like a caraciture right out of the old dick tracy serials or any given leading lady of the old film-noir movies .
 schreber ( sutherland ) , a neurotic psychiatrist who claims to be john's doctor ; and emma murdoch ( connelly ) , a jazz singer dolled up to look like a caraciture right out of the old dick tracy serials or any given leading lady of the old film-noir movies the main characters are all closely intertwined within the seemingly complex murder mystery which never actually happened , yet when they start to go through some of the expected emotions it comes off as distant , static and cold ( mediocre performances by hurt and connelly don't help either ) .
 summer catch centers around ryan dunne ( freddie prinze jr  as always prinze is pretty to look at , but his performance mainly consists of facial expressions : puppy dog love , heartbreak , frustration , self-loathing or determination .
 then he meets tenley parrish ( jessica biel ) , daughter of one of the blue bloods whose lawn he manicures  biel cries a lot , while bruce davison merely acts smarmy as her class-conscious father .
 biel cries a lot , while bruce davison merely acts smarmy as her class-conscious father .
 the only beacon is matthew lillard's fun-loving billy brubaker , the team's catcher .
 madonna ( first warning sign ) stars in body of evidence as a woman who has piles of money and no apparent job ; she lives on a houseboat and likes to parade around semi-naked , presumably for the edification of the shrimp  madonna's character is accused of forcing sex on the old goat when she knew darned well he had a heart condition  willem dafoe ( very good but completely wasted ) also stars as the lawyer who is doomed to run afoul of madonna's sexuality  dafoe and madonna have a lot of sex in this movie .
 willem dafoe ( very good but completely wasted ) also stars as the lawyer who is doomed to run afoul of madonna's sexuality  dafoe and madonna have a lot of sex in this movie .
as with his other stateside releases , jackie chan's latest chopsocky vehicle , mr  nice guy hints at jackie chan's latest transition to hollywood productions ( he made ill-fated attempts with 1980's the big brawl and 1985's the protector ) ; next in the pipeline is rush hour , a stateside production co-starring chris tucker .
 jean-claude van damme stars as ( i think ) a designer jeans executive who discovers his half-brother has been supplying him with cheaper goods  rob schneider plays van damme's partner , and rochon plays  many things are not explained in this film , but i do know that for some bizarre reason , van damme seemed to be doing a jackie chan impression throughout the flick  where chan comes off as endearing in his " normal guy " character seen in many of his films , van damme just comes off as a wimp  tsui hark ( who directed van damme's last movie , the bad , but not nearly as bad as this , " double team " ) never lets the camera rest for a second , and that's no exaggeration  we are even treated to a five second shot from the point of view of van damme's foot entering a shoe  for example , there is a scene in which van damme drives a car out of a window  van damme , an actor i usually like , is way off the mark playing " everyman "  in case i haven't yet made it clear enough , " knock off " is the worst movie of van damme's career and possibly the worst movie of the decade .
 rob schneider plays van damme's partner , and rochon plays  fabulous ! seriously , though , i have no problem with directors who want to play around with film conventions , as long as they don't get carried away  another problem with the film is that it looks cheap  hey , i have no problem suspending my disbelief in an action movie , but a line must be drawn somewhere  and schneider , here to provide comic relief i assume , is totally unfunny and over acts his way through every scene .
the groom-to-be is kyle fisher ( jon favreau ) , who is about to be married to the controlling , wedding-obsessed laura ( cameron diaz ) .
the groom-to-be is kyle fisher ( jon favreau ) , who is about to be married to the controlling , wedding-obsessed laura ( cameron diaz ) cameron diaz gives her best performance to date here , and has a lot of fun in playing the hateful laura , who eventually turns out to be more crazy than any of the five male friends .
the other friends are real estate agent robert boyd ( christian slater ) , quiet charles ( leland orser ) , and brothers , michael ( jeremy piven ) and family man adam ( daniel stern ) .
the other friends are real estate agent robert boyd ( christian slater ) , quiet charles ( leland orser ) , and brothers , michael ( jeremy piven ) and family man adam ( daniel stern ) .
the other friends are real estate agent robert boyd ( christian slater ) , quiet charles ( leland orser ) , and brothers , michael ( jeremy piven ) and family man adam ( daniel stern ) .
 halle berry is decorative and lovely as gabriel's assistant , while don cheadle is given little to do as the head fbi agent hunting gabriel .
 the storyline revolves around super hacker stanley jobson ( hugh jackman ) , recruited by gabriel to crack the government's computer codes so gabriel can gather billions for his anti-terrorist campaign .
 halle berry is decorative and lovely as gabriel's assistant , while don cheadle is given little to do as the head fbi agent hunting gabriel .
 director paul verhoeven and writer joe eszterhas , who collaborated on another shock-value project , 1992's " basic instinct , " follow the plight of a young woman ( teen tv star elizabeth berkley ) determined to make a name for herself as a topless dancer .
 there's tom ( christian slater ) , the one- dimensional action hero who works as a security guard driving an armored car full of cash  christian slater utters a few lame one-liners and does a lot of mugging for the camera .
 he and his partner , charlie ( edward asner , tv's " lou grant " ) , get stuck on a street that's rapidly turning into a river .
 a group of men , led by jimmy ( morgan freeman ) , arrive on the scene not as rescuers but as robbers  morgan freeman and minnie driver both attempt to give legitimate performances , but they are defeated by the script  freeman , one of the best cinematic thespians working today , looks suitably embarrassed to be here , but i suppose everyone needs a good paycheck from time-to-time .
 as he swims and boats his way through huntingburg's roads , he encounters some of the locals : karen ( minnie driver ) , a would-be love interest ; a bickering old couple ( richard dysart and betty white ) , who are on hand to provide comic relief ; and the easily-corrupted sheriff ( randy quaid ) , whose seeming helpfulness hides sinister ulterior motives  morgan freeman and minnie driver both attempt to give legitimate performances , but they are defeated by the script .
 as he swims and boats his way through huntingburg's roads , he encounters some of the locals : karen ( minnie driver ) , a would-be love interest ; a bickering old couple ( richard dysart and betty white ) , who are on hand to provide comic relief ; and the easily-corrupted sheriff ( randy quaid ) , whose seeming helpfulness hides sinister ulterior motives  randy quaid sneers a lot , and is totally unconvincing .
 if these arbiters of public taste think kenneth branaugh's film of shakespeare's " comedy " much ado about nothing is comedy in any modern sense of the word , it's time to get a life  branaugh , emma thompson and denzel washington are all talented performers .
 branaugh , emma thompson and denzel washington are all talented performers .
 branaugh , emma thompson and denzel washington are all talented performers .
 the only laughs to escape my belly were brought on by the gloriously inept performance of keanu reeves , the actor once again miscast as a jealous half-brother or something .
 it had so many inconsistencies it was driving me crazy ! ! for example , how can jackie shroff grow two feet of hair in just three or four days ? jackie shroff looked really stupid with his steven seagal ponytail  it's practically the same except that sanjay dutt is replaced with jackie shroff   ( i was going to give it a zero , but i personally like jackie shroff , so i loosened up a little .
 the songs are bad , the acting is bad ( especially deepti bhatnagar's ) , and the direction is the worst of all .
 the comedy scenes with jagdish and johnny lever just made me want to throw up .
 the comedy scenes with jagdish and johnny lever just made me want to throw up .
 it had so many inconsistencies it was driving me crazy ! ! for example , how can jackie shroff grow two feet of hair in just three or four days ? jackie shroff looked really stupid with his steven seagal ponytail .
a car with no brakes speeds through the town , and guido ( roberto benigni ) motions people to move out of the way i think lib ( which benigni wrote and directed ) trumps gd in one essential point : chaplin+s jewish barber gives a great speech at the climax , but to do so , he had to break completely from character benigni is given a similar situation : he is mistaken as a fascist dignitary , and must explain to a classroom filled with schoolchildren = on how scientists have concluded that aryans are the superior race benigni+s guido stays in character , and delivers the speech , keeping = the subject matter intact while showing the absurdity of its concept and although it+s focus is on the courtship of guido = to dora ( played by nicoletta braschi , benigni+s real life wife ) , a silent undercurrent creeps in benigni+s guido realizes this i believe = that benigni was cautious to preserve the tone , and i like the theory that = it is guido+s alternate reality that we+re seeing benigni+s film has won audience awards at cannes , at toronto , and is a definite shoo-in for best foreign language film ( hopefully for best picture as well ) .
and although it+s focus is on the courtship of guido = to dora ( played by nicoletta braschi , benigni+s real life wife ) , a silent undercurrent creeps in .
the second half of the film takes place five years later , in an unnamed concentration camp , where guido , dora ( by her insistence ) , and their five-year old son , giosu=e9 ( giorgio cantarini ) , are deported .
when the film opens , the accident has already happened , and stephens ( the wonderful holm ) , a polite ambulance-chaser , has arrived with the promise of a lawsuit that will eek out the truth of what really occurred that fateful morning .
but there is one living passenger , the paralyzed nicole ( polley ) , whose dark secrets of a life before the accident may affect her decision to testify .
the plot is simplicity itself : rocker ellen aim ( diane lane ) is kidnapped by a vicious street gang , led by a bloodthirsty fellow named raven ( willem dafoe , very nasty ) .
the plot is simplicity itself : rocker ellen aim ( diane lane ) is kidnapped by a vicious street gang , led by a bloodthirsty fellow named raven ( willem dafoe , very nasty ) .
her old soldier flame ( played by michael pare ) comes back into town to save her , but doesn't count on a whole bunch of things going askew .
that's about the entire plot , save for the spats with ellen's manager ( a hilarious rick moranis ) , an encounter with a doo-wop group that winds up becoming ellen's supporting act , and a whole gang of other fun little touches .
a fully loaded entertainment review - website coming in july !>from ace ventura to truman burbank , jim carrey has run the whole gamut of comic , yet sympathetic , characters .
see , steven's been having some problems with his girlfriend , robin ( leslie mann ) , and he doesn't think he has any more room in his life for a new friend .
 i know this is an odd question , but remember the opening music of " police academy 4 : citizens on patrol " , when steve guttenberg and michael winslow perform the title song " citizens on patrol " during the opening credits ? it's just like that  steve miner is the only director who helmed more than one film in the series .
in the italian american section of town a philandering husband named vinny ( john leguizamo ) tries to hide his trysts and sexual behavior from his long suffering newlywed wife dionna ( mira sorvino ) .
in the italian american section of town a philandering husband named vinny ( john leguizamo ) tries to hide his trysts and sexual behavior from his long suffering newlywed wife dionna ( mira sorvino ) .
vinny's friend ritchie ( adrien brody ) hates disco , works at a gay strip club and doesn't want any of the neighborhood folks to know .
ritchie's girl ruby ( jennifer esposito ) is trying to escape a reputation as a slut .
 in the year 2176 , there are 640 , 000 earthlings on mars , living in a matriarchal society led by a commander , played by pam grier  grier , pill-poppin' natasha henstridge , and some rookie mars police officers ( clea duvall , jason statham ) travel to the remote mining town of shining canyon to fetch " desolation " williams - that's ice cube - to bring him back to chryse city to stand trial for murder .
 grier , pill-poppin' natasha henstridge , and some rookie mars police officers ( clea duvall , jason statham ) travel to the remote mining town of shining canyon to fetch " desolation " williams - that's ice cube - to bring him back to chryse city to stand trial for murder .
 grier , pill-poppin' natasha henstridge , and some rookie mars police officers ( clea duvall , jason statham ) travel to the remote mining town of shining canyon to fetch " desolation " williams - that's ice cube - to bring him back to chryse city to stand trial for murder .
 grier , pill-poppin' natasha henstridge , and some rookie mars police officers ( clea duvall , jason statham ) travel to the remote mining town of shining canyon to fetch " desolation " williams - that's ice cube - to bring him back to chryse city to stand trial for murder .
 grier , pill-poppin' natasha henstridge , and some rookie mars police officers ( clea duvall , jason statham ) travel to the remote mining town of shining canyon to fetch " desolation " williams - that's ice cube - to bring him back to chryse city to stand trial for murder  but when they're besieged by demented , zombie-like , body-snatching miners , they readily free the scowling ice cube since they need him for protection .
randy pear ( jon lovitz ) promised his wife beverly ( kathy najimy ) and two kids a fun-filled vacation in las vegas high points for me include a bit involving kathy bates as a roadside squirrel salesperson and an intricately set up gag that carries jon lovitz and family from a bizarre museum to an outdoor rally , with an utterly tasteless and screamingly funny pay-off .
randy pear ( jon lovitz ) promised his wife beverly ( kathy najimy ) and two kids a fun-filled vacation in las vegas high points for me include a bit involving kathy bates as a roadside squirrel salesperson and an intricately set up gag that carries jon lovitz and family from a bizarre museum to an outdoor rally , with an utterly tasteless and screamingly funny pay-off .
owen templeton ( cuba gooding jr .
pollini hitches a ride with zack ( wayne knight ) , a hyper-tense ambulance driver carrying a human heart across country for a transplant operation .
at first glance , they seem blandly wholesome , but all that changes when tracy buzzes the home of her boyfriend shawn ( dean cain ) and spies him swimming with another woman .
as it is , the film retains some value , thanks to an excellent performance by charlotte rampling , and a more mature francois ozon in the director's chair marie ( charlotte rampling ) and her husband jean ( bruno cremer ) lounge on the beach this is mostly thanks to the excellent camera work by antoine heberle and jeanne lapoirie , who shot the film in a dreamy haze , and the lead performance by rampling rampling is so expressive in her portrayal of marie , you connect with her character instantly , despite that she's delusional .
marie ( charlotte rampling ) and her husband jean ( bruno cremer ) lounge on the beach .
the other actors , particularly jacques nolot , are excellent too .
contact's wonderfully presented story deals with ellie arroway ( jodie foster ) , a radio astronomer whose preference of study involves the outdated technique of " merely listening " to sounds out in space .
her interest in the field of astronomy developed at a very young age , encouraged by her loving father , ted ( david morse ) , who let ellie use a small ham radio to pick up on frequencies and communicate with people as far away as pensacola , fl ( that was , of course , before the days of internet chat rooms )  david drumlin ( tom skerritt ) , who has authority over seti but finds the program a frivolous waste of time and money , is ready to pull the plug on any and all seti funding .
in puerto rico , she meets palmer joss ( matthew mcconaughey ) , a writer examining the effects of technology on the world's overall happiness ; a one- time seminary student who describes himself as " a man of the cloth , without the cloth " .
 david drumlin ( tom skerritt ) , who has authority over seti but finds the program a frivolous waste of time and money , is ready to pull the plug on any and all seti funding .
the frat's leaders are otter and boon ( tim matheson and peter riegert ) .
the frat's leaders are otter and boon ( tim matheson and peter riegert ) .
he's got a steady-date , katy ( karen allen ) , but she's sick of playing second-fiddle to a bottle of j .
bluto !bluto , played by the late , great john belushi , is the man .
from the very first bird's eye view of chicago , zooming in slowly toward the insignificant bob rueland ( david duchovny ) , accompanied by the " return to me " ballad ( by whom ? ) , we can tell we're in for something sweet disappointingly , david alan grier's charlie , however much i like him , was the most flatly-written duchovny here does a laudable job of shaking off his fox mulder persona -- with the help of his fellow co-stars rarely do we see any hint of special agent fox mulder  "duchovny , who is excellent at understatement and self-deprecation as an actor showcases his considerable comedic talent on screen though an unlikely pair , duchovny and driver gradually warm up to each other as the movie progresses .
>from the festive little family restaurant to grace ( minnie driver ) and bob's wardrobes minnie driver is engaging as always as the sweet , innocent grace with nothing but a good heart to offer though an unlikely pair , duchovny and driver gradually warm up to each other as the movie progresses .
from the very first bird's eye view of chicago , zooming in slowly toward the insignificant bob rueland ( david duchovny ) , accompanied by the " return to me " ballad ( by whom ? ) , we can tell we're in for something sweet disappointingly , david alan grier's charlie , however much i like him , was the most flatly-written .
 gary " gal " dove ( played by ray winstone ) has retired from a london career of crime and is living on a luxurious villa in spain  in sexy beast even the plot twists have gray beards .
 back in london gang boss teddy bass ( ian mcshane , tv's lovejoy ) is planning to break into a safety deposit room in a bank and he wants gal .
 ben kingsley ? " my response would be that anyone who has seen alan arkin in wait until dark , henry fonda in once upon a time in the west , or anthony hopkins in the silence of the lambs should have guessed it  that is the principle that works for kingsley in sexy beast  he sends his most rabid henchman don logan ( ben kingsley ) to fetch gal  kingsley makes don a compact package of fury and nastiness  further respectability comes from ben kingsley's high-powered performance .
 " however , if gal says " no " don will do whatever it takes to turn it into a yes including threatening guy's ex-porn- star wife deedee ( amanda redman ) .
martin riggs ( mel gibson ) and sgt .
roger murtaugh ( danny glover ) ?let's just say that when one partner asks the other partner to strip to his boxer shorts and then further asks him to run out into the middle of the road , flapping his arms while feverishly cackling like a chicken just to create a distraction , his partner actually does it !the familiar lethal weapon family is back , including rene russo , who is now the expectant mother of riggs' child and joe pesci as the soprana-like , foul-mouthed former accountant who has decided to become a private eye .
roger murtaugh ( danny glover ) ?let's just say that when one partner asks the other partner to strip to his boxer shorts and then further asks him to run out into the middle of the road , flapping his arms while feverishly cackling like a chicken just to create a distraction , his partner actually does it !the familiar lethal weapon family is back , including rene russo , who is now the expectant mother of riggs' child and joe pesci as the soprana-like , foul-mouthed former accountant who has decided to become a private eye .
roger murtaugh ( danny glover ) ?let's just say that when one partner asks the other partner to strip to his boxer shorts and then further asks him to run out into the middle of the road , flapping his arms while feverishly cackling like a chicken just to create a distraction , his partner actually does it !the familiar lethal weapon family is back , including rene russo , who is now the expectant mother of riggs' child and joe pesci as the soprana-like , foul-mouthed former accountant who has decided to become a private eye .
new to the team is chris rock , also a fast-talking , up and coming detective .
latit , her father ( played by naseeruddin shah ) , is juggling many problems , not the least of which is worrying about the caterer has hired pk dubey .
luke skywalker ( mark hamill ) , princess leia ( carrie fisher ) , lando calrissian , ( billy dee williams ) , chewbacca ( peter mayhew ) , c3p0 ( anthony daniels ) and r2-d2 ( kenny baker ) are on a rescue mission to luke's home planet of tatooine by now ( or then - 1983 ) , mark hamill , harrison ford , and carrie fisher have all matured in their on-screen personas .
luke skywalker ( mark hamill ) , princess leia ( carrie fisher ) , lando calrissian , ( billy dee williams ) , chewbacca ( peter mayhew ) , c3p0 ( anthony daniels ) and r2-d2 ( kenny baker ) are on a rescue mission to luke's home planet of tatooine by now ( or then - 1983 ) , mark hamill , harrison ford , and carrie fisher have all matured in their on-screen personas .
luke skywalker ( mark hamill ) , princess leia ( carrie fisher ) , lando calrissian , ( billy dee williams ) , chewbacca ( peter mayhew ) , c3p0 ( anthony daniels ) and r2-d2 ( kenny baker ) are on a rescue mission to luke's home planet of tatooine as in empire , billy dee williams gives us another human hero to root for .
luke skywalker ( mark hamill ) , princess leia ( carrie fisher ) , lando calrissian , ( billy dee williams ) , chewbacca ( peter mayhew ) , c3p0 ( anthony daniels ) and r2-d2 ( kenny baker ) are on a rescue mission to luke's home planet of tatooine .
luke skywalker ( mark hamill ) , princess leia ( carrie fisher ) , lando calrissian , ( billy dee williams ) , chewbacca ( peter mayhew ) , c3p0 ( anthony daniels ) and r2-d2 ( kenny baker ) are on a rescue mission to luke's home planet of tatooine .
 all in all , a bad movie starring some great actors doing solid work , especially michael clarke duncan as the man of the hour , john coffey .
 all in all , a bad movie starring some great actors doing solid work , especially michael clarke duncan as the man of the hour , john coffey .
 am i supposed to identify with anyone in this film ? or even more importantly , am i supposed to give a rat's ass about anyone in this film ? well , if i was , i sure missed that boat , because the only thing that i ended up caring about during this entire picture was the obscene amount of fat that tom hanks has been able to burrow under his loose chin  i didn't see the point of the movie , i didn't see the point of the story and i certainly didn't see the point in tom hanks' big double-chin .
 how julia roberts is used solely as a " puppy dog " character , puttering around in the background while we endure the complete bitchiness of zeta-jones' character , who is not one bit funny or romantic ( two ideal ingredients in a " romantic comedy " ) , is also beyond me  it starts off slow , it's got no energy , it doesn't engage you with any of its characters ( julia barely gets somewhat interesting in the film , everyone else  btw , all the talk about this film was that julia roberts was to be in a fat suit for one scene ( her character is supposed to have lost 60 pounds ) , so when the scene finally came , i did get a little excited about what it might look like and then  well , it basically just looked like julia roberts in a fat suit ! ugh .
 how julia roberts is used solely as a " puppy dog " character , puttering around in the background while we endure the complete bitchiness of zeta-jones' character , who is not one bit funny or romantic ( two ideal ingredients in a " romantic comedy " ) , is also beyond me .
 and why they chose john cusack , a great , quirky actor in his own right , to play the most bland , uninteresting and unfetching character ( with zero chemistry with either of his leads ) is further more , beyond me .
 and to anybody who decided that this project was " funny " enough to greenlight featuring the talents mentioned above , along with billy crystal , christopher walker , seth green and stanley tucci .
 and to anybody who decided that this project was " funny " enough to greenlight featuring the talents mentioned above , along with billy crystal , christopher walker , seth green and stanley tucci .
the film begins with capone , played perfectly by deniro , declaring that he is not a violent man and he is a firm believer in following all laws .
elliot ness , played with perfect ingenuity by kevin costner , is a character that surely grows during the course of the film .
sean connery , who won an academy award for best supporting actor in his role , plays malone , an aging cop who decides to make one final run as a member of the untouchables connery plays his character with the exact amount of wit and experience needed .
andy garcia does a wonderful job as george stone , a young man who is just becoming a police officer .
charles martin smith is also fantastic as the final member who attempts to use an income tax offense against capone smith is perfect for his role as he adds some valuable comic relief to the film .
 ralph fiennes ( strange days , schindler's list ) gives a gripping performance as count laszlo almasy , a victim of amnesia and horrible burns after world war ii in italy  the only redeeming qualities about this film are the fine acting of fiennes and dafoe and the beautiful desert cinematography .
 count almasy begins to remember what happened to him as it is explained by a stranger ( willem dafoe , basquiat )  the only redeeming qualities about this film are the fine acting of fiennes and dafoe and the beautiful desert cinematography .
 anyway , he is taken in by hana ( juliette binoche , the horseman on the roof ) , a boring war-torn nurse .
 his love ( kirstin scott thomas , mission impossible ) was severely injured in a plane crash , and eventually died in a cave .
 watching " mimic " i was tempted several times to yell at the screen " turn the lights on ! the switch is to your right ! use common sense ! just do it ! you'll be able to see the monster in the corner ! " there's a scene where mira sorvino is standing in subway station while the lights are flickering on and off  it looked like the light operator was having a seizure , and sorvino didn't even notice - she just stood there looking like she was having deep thoughts .
writers : dennis feldman and jonathan hensleigh ( based on the comic book by chuck pfarrer ) starring : jamie lee curtis , william baldwin , donald sutherland , joanna pacula , sherman augustus , marshall bell , cliff curtis , julio oscar mechoso i suppose i'm not extremely surprised that " virus " comes to us from a deciple of james cameron ( john bruno ) , and if i strain real hard , i could even say that it's an obvious given , particuarly looking from the standpoint of mr  i almost don't even have to say that the acting from everyone ranges from sub-par to horrific , the former being jamie lee curtis in the lead showing off what a strong female lead she is ( and she is , just not really here ) and the latter being - and it pains me to say this as he's a particular favorite of mine - donald sutherland , who plays the captain so poorly and without a second of credibility that this will go down as the performance-of-which-he-should-be-ashamed .
writers : dennis feldman and jonathan hensleigh ( based on the comic book by chuck pfarrer ) starring : jamie lee curtis , william baldwin , donald sutherland , joanna pacula , sherman augustus , marshall bell , cliff curtis , julio oscar mechoso i suppose i'm not extremely surprised that " virus " comes to us from a deciple of james cameron ( john bruno ) , and if i strain real hard , i could even say that it's an obvious given , particuarly looking from the standpoint of mr .
writers : dennis feldman and jonathan hensleigh ( based on the comic book by chuck pfarrer ) starring : jamie lee curtis , william baldwin , donald sutherland , joanna pacula , sherman augustus , marshall bell , cliff curtis , julio oscar mechoso i suppose i'm not extremely surprised that " virus " comes to us from a deciple of james cameron ( john bruno ) , and if i strain real hard , i could even say that it's an obvious given , particuarly looking from the standpoint of mr  i almost don't even have to say that the acting from everyone ranges from sub-par to horrific , the former being jamie lee curtis in the lead showing off what a strong female lead she is ( and she is , just not really here ) and the latter being - and it pains me to say this as he's a particular favorite of mine - donald sutherland , who plays the captain so poorly and without a second of credibility that this will go down as the performance-of-which-he-should-be-ashamed  it happens every now and then , and it only helps sutherland's career that no one , except for an elite few , even bothered to see this film .
writers : dennis feldman and jonathan hensleigh ( based on the comic book by chuck pfarrer ) starring : jamie lee curtis , william baldwin , donald sutherland , joanna pacula , sherman augustus , marshall bell , cliff curtis , julio oscar mechoso i suppose i'm not extremely surprised that " virus " comes to us from a deciple of james cameron ( john bruno ) , and if i strain real hard , i could even say that it's an obvious given , particuarly looking from the standpoint of mr .
writers : dennis feldman and jonathan hensleigh ( based on the comic book by chuck pfarrer ) starring : jamie lee curtis , william baldwin , donald sutherland , joanna pacula , sherman augustus , marshall bell , cliff curtis , julio oscar mechoso i suppose i'm not extremely surprised that " virus " comes to us from a deciple of james cameron ( john bruno ) , and if i strain real hard , i could even say that it's an obvious given , particuarly looking from the standpoint of mr .
 together , anne parillaud and william baldwin conspire to make " shattered image " the biggest piece of hooey since the stallone/stone " thriller " " the specialist .
 together , anne parillaud and william baldwin conspire to make " shattered image " the biggest piece of hooey since the stallone/stone " thriller " " the specialist  " the film poses the question " what if the life you're living now is really a dream , and your dreams reality ? " it's either about a woman who's haunted by a recurring ( and recurring and recurring ) nightmare that she's a hired assassin , or it's about a hired assassin who's haunted by a recurring ( and recurring and recurring ) nightmare that she's honeymooning with william baldwin in jamaica .
the chief complaints of those who disliked the futuristic adventure appear to be that the movie focused on visuals instead of substance , that the story was thin , that mark wahlberg's character was colorless and that the surprise ending sucked like astronaut leo davidson ( wahlberg ) , the film hits the ground running , whisking viewers through a head-spinning series of solid one-liners and engaging vignettes and establishing a sense of thrust that carries us through the more traditional fight scenes that come later as for wahlberg , consider what burton does with his character as a man who just wants out , wahlberg is focused , subtle and sly the 2001 " planet of the apes " offers a different set of great scenes , much cooler looking monkeys , fine acting from wahlberg , bonham carter , paul giamatti and tim roth , and a not so good ending .
he doesn't want to lead humanity and he isn't looking for romance from a pretty , but dull human ( estella warren ) or a dynamic ape ( helena bonham carter , terrific as an equal-rights activist ) .
he doesn't want to lead humanity and he isn't looking for romance from a pretty , but dull human ( estella warren ) or a dynamic ape ( helena bonham carter , terrific as an equal-rights activist ) the 2001 " planet of the apes " offers a different set of great scenes , much cooler looking monkeys , fine acting from wahlberg , bonham carter , paul giamatti and tim roth , and a not so good ending .
he doesn't want to lead humanity and he isn't looking for romance from a pretty , but dull human ( estella warren ) or a dynamic ape ( helena bonham carter , terrific as an equal-rights activist ) the 2001 " planet of the apes " offers a different set of great scenes , much cooler looking monkeys , fine acting from wahlberg , bonham carter , paul giamatti and tim roth , and a not so good ending .
the 2001 " planet of the apes " offers a different set of great scenes , much cooler looking monkeys , fine acting from wahlberg , bonham carter , paul giamatti and tim roth , and a not so good ending .
hilarious , ultra-low budget comedy from film school dropout kevin smith chronicles a day in the life of two convenience store slackers ( brian o'halloran and jeff anderson ) .
hilarious , ultra-low budget comedy from film school dropout kevin smith chronicles a day in the life of two convenience store slackers ( brian o'halloran and jeff anderson ) .
 ewan mcgregor - codename : " eye " - is pointing a high-tech rifle-ly gadget at a fat , bald business-oriented american engaging in illicit sexual activities in a window across the street  i've got reason to believe , you see - i admire a lot of ewan mcgregor's previous work  the rest of the movie involves ewan mcgregor's eye character following ashley judd around to every corner of the united states , totally and completely obsessed by this woman from afar  ewan mcgregor at one point takes up residence in a bell tower just so he could be repeatedly awakened and deafened by the giant bell .
 lang , through an elaborate and expensive teleconferencing briefcase .
 when eye tracks his target to an expensive- looking secluded house , he witnesses a mysterious and beautiful woman ( ashley judd ) take a knife out and proceed to stab the poor bastard  the rest of the movie involves ewan mcgregor's eye character following ashley judd around to every corner of the united states , totally and completely obsessed by this woman from afar  judd  judd everything she knows about wearing wigs ; jason priestley's awfully played dirty desert vagrant #1 , who tries to emulate dennis hopper a la blue velvet , but fails miserably ; and the cop-who-sees-ashley-fleeing-an-accident-scene-and- then-wants-to-pay-for-sex- but-is-shot  the last ten or so minutes featured a conversation between the eye and the judd that was supposed to be some sort of revealing exposition .
 judd everything she knows about wearing wigs ; jason priestley's awfully played dirty desert vagrant #1 , who tries to emulate dennis hopper a la blue velvet , but fails miserably ; and the cop-who-sees-ashley-fleeing-an-accident-scene-and- then-wants-to-pay-for-sex- but-is-shot  jason priestly starts philosophizing about sharks , then laughs maniacally .
 one survivor finally does turn up , nadia ( joanna pacula ) , who informs the suicidal and stern captain ( donald sutherland ) and one of the crew , kit foster ( jamie lee curtis ) , that a mysterious alien life form hit the santi mir space station which then was transported down to the ship , taking over the minds of all of the electrical machines and thinking that humans are viruses that should be completely wiped out .
 one survivor finally does turn up , nadia ( joanna pacula ) , who informs the suicidal and stern captain ( donald sutherland ) and one of the crew , kit foster ( jamie lee curtis ) , that a mysterious alien life form hit the santi mir space station which then was transported down to the ship , taking over the minds of all of the electrical machines and thinking that humans are viruses that should be completely wiped out  donald sutherland has fallen on hard times recently by starring in thoroughly disposable films , such as 1994's " the puppet masters , " although i just watched him in the superb 1978 sci-fi classic " invasion of the body snatchers , " where he was fabulous .
 one survivor finally does turn up , nadia ( joanna pacula ) , who informs the suicidal and stern captain ( donald sutherland ) and one of the crew , kit foster ( jamie lee curtis ) , that a mysterious alien life form hit the santi mir space station which then was transported down to the ship , taking over the minds of all of the electrical machines and thinking that humans are viruses that should be completely wiped out  in her second return to horror in the last year , jamie lee curtis once again proves to be a strong and resourceful heroine , but that is about it .
 the last of the three top-billers is william baldwin , but it is fairly hard to say if he is good or not in the picture , since he has nothing to do .
 roger moore ( the real james bond ) mockingly plays the cliche-spewing " chief " of the spice girls , and darn it all , he's fun to watch .
 mark mckenney also is good as a screenwriter trying to pitch film ideas to the band's manager ( richard e .
zero effect gets its title from the main character , daryl zero ( bill pullman ) , although we don't understand what it truly means until the very last line of dialogue in the film .
zero's accomplice is steve arlo ( ben stiller ) , a " normal " guy who does the business side of the job -- he's the one who actually speaks to clients and explains zero's greatness as an investigator ben stiller is also a very funny individual ; he's the kind of comedian who makes normal lines sound funny .
the opening scene has steve explaining the many virtues of zero's talents to soon-to-be client gregory stark ( ryan o'neal ) .
his path leads to a young , pretty paramedic named gloria sullivan ( kim dickens ) o'neal also gives his character a bit of depth ; and kim dickens , last seen ( and underused ) in mercury rising , gets a chance to show us her talent here , giving gloria the realism this kind of character really needs .
 money talks is about a black ticket scalper named franklin hatchett ( played less annoyingly than expected by chris tucker ) .
 franklin's only hope : james russell ( charlie sheen ) , an investigative reporter for the local news who's out to prove himself a worthy journalist .
the truman show ( paramount pictures ) running time : 1 hour 42 minutes starring jim carrey and ed harris directed by peter weir after a long wait , jim carrey's dramatic debut finally makes it to the big screen .
the truman show ( paramount pictures ) running time : 1 hour 42 minutes starring jim carrey and ed harris directed by peter weir after a long wait , jim carrey's dramatic debut finally makes it to the big screen ed harris brings an extreme intensity to christoff , the megalomaniac creator of the show .
unfortunately , he's barely in the film , and for the first hour dosen't appear at all !also disappointing is natascha mcelhone's character sylvia .
harrison ford stars as dr .
hints are dropped from various times of the night kimble's wife , helen ( sela ward ) was murdered .
there is a great sense of comradeship between gerard and his two closest deputies cosmo renfo ( pantoliano ) and biggs ( roebuck ) .
there is a great sense of comradeship between gerard and his two closest deputies cosmo renfo ( pantoliano ) and biggs ( roebuck ) .
but as for men in black , the only scene i still recall is when will smith is squishing all those giant roaches as you probably already know , will smith and tommy lee jones ( agents k and j , respectively ) belong to a top secret agency known as divison 5 , or it's nickname mib ( men in black .
this was after the release of the high-grossing batman forever , and it said that tommy lee jones and chris o'donnell were being considered for the roles ( in the comic book , there were no black men in black as you probably already know , will smith and tommy lee jones ( agents k and j , respectively ) belong to a top secret agency known as divison 5 , or it's nickname mib ( men in black .
this was after the release of the high-grossing batman forever , and it said that tommy lee jones and chris o'donnell were being considered for the roles ( in the comic book , there were no black men in black kind of weird , huh ? )all i can say is , thank god they didn't cast chris o'donnell .
 the always watchable morgan freeman plays a detective who becomes personally involved in a case involving missing girls  freeman notes that each of the young women who've disappeared are all strong willed , assertive , and more successful in their careers than the average girl  anyway , one of the women manages to escape ( ashly judd ) and teams up with freeman to  and as for freeman , kiss the girls is his second dog in a year : first chain reaction , now this .
 anyway , one of the women manages to escape ( ashly judd ) and teams up with freeman to  thus , ashly judd comes across all out of focus , instead of being the heart of the story .
by phil curtolo mel gibson ( braveheart ) gave a gripping performance as the father of a young kidnapped boy in ron howard's ransom .
jackie chan is the barry sanders of moviemaking almost every cent that's invested in a jackie chan movie goes for stunts , and as chan does his own stunts , the rest of the money goes to pay his hospital bills jackie is sent by the un to retrieve a cache of lost nazi gold in the north african desert , and is chased by a horde of neo-nazi sympathizers and two stereotypical arabs ( one of the things i like about jackie chan movies : no political correctness ) however , you've got to go with what you've got , and what you've got in jackie chan is something special -- a talent that mainstream hollywood should , could , and ought to utilize .
 ironically , the parts of " batman and robin " that work are the ones showing the characters in street clothing , and most of those succeed because of george clooney as bruce wayne  easily the best batman yet , clooney's expressive eyes and weary smile gives the character a sense of depth that the script doesn't even hint at  the film's most effective scene is a tender , quiet exchange between clooney and alfred ( michael gough ) , bruce wayne's butler and surrogate father  give alicia silverstone her walking papers , while keeping clooney , o'donnell and michael gough .
 the film's most effective scene is a tender , quiet exchange between clooney and alfred ( michael gough ) , bruce wayne's butler and surrogate father  give alicia silverstone her walking papers , while keeping clooney , o'donnell and michael gough .
 as for the other heroes , chris o'donnell's robin is enthusiastic , perky and horny as hell , while pudgy alicia silverstone is hard to accept as an athlete in her debut as batgirl .
 as for the other heroes , chris o'donnell's robin is enthusiastic , perky and horny as hell , while pudgy alicia silverstone is hard to accept as an athlete in her debut as batgirl  give alicia silverstone her walking papers , while keeping clooney , o'donnell and michael gough .
 the joker , brilliantly overplayed by jack nicholson , was at once charismatic and repellent  in a movie filled to the brim with major characters , the decision to add the entirely unnecessary batgirl and elle macpherson as bruce wayne's girlfriend is puzzling  call jack nicholson and michelle pfieffer and beg them to reprise their roles as the joker and catwoman .
blade is the movie that shows that wesley snipes really can live up to his potential as one of hollywood's premier leading men blade ( snipes ) is half man , half vampire .
blade runs up against the evil deacon frost ( stephen dorff ) a maverick in the vampire community .
i had originally written george clooney off as a one-note actor , incapable of depth but occasionally showing a little flair as i said , clooney is terrific , and he's matched by lopez .
my problem is that i'm a slow reader , and not very dedicated -- i'll enjoy portions of a book and then set it down for months at a time ( it's taken me the last six weeks to get through the first one hundred pages of anna karenina , even though i'm loving the book ) here , he plays jack foley , a middle aged guy who robs banks for a living he goes to jail -- which is interesting -- only to break out five cinematic minutes later with the help of his friend , buddy ( ving rhames ) the supporting cast is strong , led by the always-reliable ving rhames .
we're then introduced to karen sisco ( jennifer lopez ) , a u as i said , clooney is terrific , and he's matched by lopez lopez is , of course , beautiful , but she can act , too .
in addition to this , i typically don't read anything created after the 19th century however , i don't think it should be necessary to read the book beforehand in order to judge the quality of the film dennis farina , who plays karen's father , is good , as is don cheadle as the profoundly stupid villain .
needless to say , i haven't read the elmore leonard novel out of sight , on which steven soderbergh's new film is based steve zahn , who plays jack's nearly-brain dead accomplice glenn , steals all of his scenes ( and that's in a film where every scene is already at a high level ) .
recap a few thousand years later , where a soldier named rick ( played by brandan fraser ) aids a young historian named evelyn ( played by rachel wiesz ) and her brother , jonathan ( played by john hannah ) in finding the book of amon ra , in the process inadvertently freeing the mummy but at least it's a break from the naive heroes that brendan fraser has been playing a lot of .
recap a few thousand years later , where a soldier named rick ( played by brandan fraser ) aids a young historian named evelyn ( played by rachel wiesz ) and her brother , jonathan ( played by john hannah ) in finding the book of amon ra , in the process inadvertently freeing the mummy .
recap a few thousand years later , where a soldier named rick ( played by brandan fraser ) aids a young historian named evelyn ( played by rachel wiesz ) and her brother , jonathan ( played by john hannah ) in finding the book of amon ra , in the process inadvertently freeing the mummy ideally , for it to be successful , the film would have to focus on one the more action oriented aspect , with one character serving as the comic relief ( that would be johnson ) .
ingredients : possessed plastic dolls in love , plastic dolls having sex starring : jennifer tilly , voice of brad dourif , katherine heigl , nick stabile , john ritter synopsis : this is the fourth film in the chucky series , which debuted in the late 1980s  in bride of chucky , chucky's longtime girlfriend tiffany ( jennifer tilly ) dies and her spirit inhabits a female plastic doll through voodoo  the suspenseless bride of chucky relies mostly on jennifer tilly's cleavage to keep attention during the first half , and on occasional puns to keep attention during the second half .
ingredients : possessed plastic dolls in love , plastic dolls having sex starring : jennifer tilly , voice of brad dourif , katherine heigl , nick stabile , john ritter synopsis : this is the fourth film in the chucky series , which debuted in the late 1980s .
ingredients : possessed plastic dolls in love , plastic dolls having sex starring : jennifer tilly , voice of brad dourif , katherine heigl , nick stabile , john ritter synopsis : this is the fourth film in the chucky series , which debuted in the late 1980s .
pierce brosnan plays the volcanologist sent to study the volcano and , perhaps more by hunch than actual scientific proof , is determined that the volcano will be arupting in the very near future .
or at least the mayor of dante's peak ( linda hamilton ) .
the truman show is about a man ( jim carrey ) whose entire life has been engineered by a corporation and marketed to the public it begins with jim carrey looking into a mirror , reciting the crucial " eat me " scene from alive , wishing his neighbors a good day , afternoon and evening , and living in domestic bliss with his wife ( laura linney ) .
it begins with jim carrey looking into a mirror , reciting the crucial " eat me " scene from alive , wishing his neighbors a good day , afternoon and evening , and living in domestic bliss with his wife ( laura linney ) .
the death was staged by director christof ( ed harris ) , who wanted to put a fear of water into truman to keep him from leaving the island .
 there's ginger ( geri halliwell ) , the brainy one , sporty ( melanie chisholm ) , the athletic one , baby ( emma bunton ) , the childish one , posh ( victoria adams ) , the fashion-conscious one , and scary ( melanie brown ) , the one with a tongue pierced back so far you're almost certain the post sticks out her throat .
 there's ginger ( geri halliwell ) , the brainy one , sporty ( melanie chisholm ) , the athletic one , baby ( emma bunton ) , the childish one , posh ( victoria adams ) , the fashion-conscious one , and scary ( melanie brown ) , the one with a tongue pierced back so far you're almost certain the post sticks out her throat .
 there's ginger ( geri halliwell ) , the brainy one , sporty ( melanie chisholm ) , the athletic one , baby ( emma bunton ) , the childish one , posh ( victoria adams ) , the fashion-conscious one , and scary ( melanie brown ) , the one with a tongue pierced back so far you're almost certain the post sticks out her throat .
 there's ginger ( geri halliwell ) , the brainy one , sporty ( melanie chisholm ) , the athletic one , baby ( emma bunton ) , the childish one , posh ( victoria adams ) , the fashion-conscious one , and scary ( melanie brown ) , the one with a tongue pierced back so far you're almost certain the post sticks out her throat .
 there's ginger ( geri halliwell ) , the brainy one , sporty ( melanie chisholm ) , the athletic one , baby ( emma bunton ) , the childish one , posh ( victoria adams ) , the fashion-conscious one , and scary ( melanie brown ) , the one with a tongue pierced back so far you're almost certain the post sticks out her throat .
he hires a private investigator to find her : pat healy ( matt dillon ) it is only a matter of time before ted finds out that he had been double-crossed , and goes to get her for himself dillon is exceptionally creepy , especially with his capped teeth .
and rounding out the cast is ted+s friend dom ( chris elliot ) , tanning addict magda ( lin shaye ) , modern troubador/greek chorus ron lichman , and mary+s sweet mom , markie post ( where has she been ? ! ) .
thirteen years ago , geeky ted ( ben stiller ) lucked out in having dazzling mary ( cameron diaz ) go with him to the senior prom ben stiller also fares very well , totally changing his image from his _reality bites_ and _flirting with disaster_ straight men to being a , ( how to say it ? ) , a complete loser approach this with an open mind , and you will reap the benefits hugely .
thirteen years ago , geeky ted ( ben stiller ) lucked out in having dazzling mary ( cameron diaz ) go with him to the senior prom cameron diaz makes her totally charming , and the audience respects her , even though women in general do not usually undress before an open window .
and rounding out the cast is ted+s friend dom ( chris elliot ) , tanning addict magda ( lin shaye ) , modern troubador/greek chorus ron lichman , and mary+s sweet mom , markie post ( where has she been ? ! ) chris elliot+s role , skin blemishes and all , becomes merely tasteless and boring .
gun wielding arnold schwarzenegger has a change of heart by the film's end and becomes a believer in god instead of a skeptic , going through an amazing transformation by having a christian epiphany in the final scene as he becomes someone who can now beat the devil by his faith alone  arnold plays an alcoholic security guard who finds his new mission in life is to stop satan ( occupying gabriel byrne's body and possessing a wall st  it is now a few days before the new year celebration for 2000 and arnold and his wise-cracking security guard partner kevin pollack are hired to guard a wall street turd , and when he is fired upon by a renograde priest , thomas aquinas , arnold saves him and through a ridiculous chase captures the tongue less priest who fired the shot  he , nevertheless , can speak and tells arnold an 'end of days' is coming as prophesized in revelations  it is now up to arnold to save the world and find the chosen woman  he quickly finds christine and does everything to protect her from all the evil forces around her , as the film includes ludicrous helicopter rescues , people jumping out of windows , satan taking a piss and dropping a match to kill arnold's partner as the piss explodes like gasoline , satan being fired at .
 arnold plays an alcoholic security guard who finds his new mission in life is to stop satan ( occupying gabriel byrne's body and possessing a wall st .
 the chosen woman is christine york ( robin ) .
 it is now a few days before the new year celebration for 2000 and arnold and his wise-cracking security guard partner kevin pollack are hired to guard a wall street turd , and when he is fired upon by a renograde priest , thomas aquinas , arnold saves him and through a ridiculous chase captures the tongue less priest who fired the shot .
 the heroine of this movie is emily eden ( melanie griffith ) , tough lady cop who sometimes shows too much enthusiasm in battling bad guys on the streets of new york  but the worst insult to viewer's audience is terrible miscasting of melanie griffith .
 during one of such actions , her partner nick ( jamey sheridan ) got hurt and as a result , she becomes depressed .
 things get even more complicated when she develops feelings for young cabalistic scholar ariel ( eric thal )  but , on the other hand , other actors are more convincing ( lee richardson as an old rabbi , thal as ariel and charming mia sara as his intended bride ) , and the photography by andrzej bartkowiak very effectively creates atmosphere of warmth when the scenes take place in hassidic community .
 but , on the other hand , other actors are more convincing ( lee richardson as an old rabbi , thal as ariel and charming mia sara as his intended bride ) , and the photography by andrzej bartkowiak very effectively creates atmosphere of warmth when the scenes take place in hassidic community .
 but , on the other hand , other actors are more convincing ( lee richardson as an old rabbi , thal as ariel and charming mia sara as his intended bride ) , and the photography by andrzej bartkowiak very effectively creates atmosphere of warmth when the scenes take place in hassidic community .
dora ( fernanda montenegro ) sits behind a make-shift desk at rio+s major train station fernanda montenegro surprisingly got an oscar nomination for this very delicate performance , but the true marvel is that of vinicius de oliveira , who plays josu ? .
he , like the discoveries of j ? r ? mie renier ( _la promesse_ ) and giorgio cantarini ( _life is beautiful_ ) , prove that the true acting discoveries may be outside of the united states .
he , like the discoveries of j ? r ? mie renier ( _la promesse_ ) and giorgio cantarini ( _life is beautiful_ ) , prove that the true acting discoveries may be outside of the united states .
plot : upon the realization that they are failing all of their classes , two roommates try to find a third roomie who will kill himself , since the school's charter automatically grants top grades to the roommates of any student who succeeds in suicide  critique : despite this film's interesting premise and dark subject matter , this movie sucks because it is unfunny , boring , and presents us with one of tom everett scott's worst acting performances  skip it altogether ! little known facts about this film and its stars : during auditions for that thing you do ! , tom everett scott's first feature film role , director tom hanks was opposed to hiring tom because of the fact that scott could've passed for hanks 15 years ago  it wasn't until hanks' wife rita wilson saw the audition tape , and decided he was cute , that hanks decided to risk hiring scott  the actor who played scott cooper in this film , mark-paul gosselaar , is best known for having played the character of zack morris on tv's " saved by the bell " .
plot : upon the realization that they are failing all of their classes , two roommates try to find a third roomie who will kill himself , since the school's charter automatically grants top grades to the roommates of any student who succeeds in suicide  critique : despite this film's interesting premise and dark subject matter , this movie sucks because it is unfunny , boring , and presents us with one of tom everett scott's worst acting performances  skip it altogether ! little known facts about this film and its stars : during auditions for that thing you do ! , tom everett scott's first feature film role , director tom hanks was opposed to hiring tom because of the fact that scott could've passed for hanks 15 years ago  it wasn't until hanks' wife rita wilson saw the audition tape , and decided he was cute , that hanks decided to risk hiring scott .
 the actor who played scott cooper in this film , mark-paul gosselaar , is best known for having played the character of zack morris on tv's " saved by the bell " .
 the bully in question , bobby kent ( nick stahl ) , is certainly an unpleasant piece of work but he doesn't exactly tower over his colleagues in the pathological department .
 he hounds and harries and humiliates his " best friend " marty ( played by brad renfro ) and marty's girlfriend lisa ( rachel miner ) doesn't care for it at all and comes up with the idea of killing bobby .
 he hounds and harries and humiliates his " best friend " marty ( played by brad renfro ) and marty's girlfriend lisa ( rachel miner ) doesn't care for it at all and comes up with the idea of killing bobby .
 of all the non-criminal possibilities brought about by rendering oneself invisible , in " hollow man " kevin bacon's character opts to commit sex crimes  er , it's kevin bacon who plays the super smart military bio-molecular research scientist ? something sounds horribly wrong already .
that thing focuses on the wonders , a teen rock band from erie , pennsylvania that is suddenly thrust into the national spotlight in 1964 when they score a major dance hit called , of course , " that thing you do ! "the group's members are , naturally a diverse group : there's brooding lead singer and songwriter jimmy ( johnathon schaech ) ; girl-crazy lenny ( steve zahn ) , the lead guitarist ; a goofy , geeky type known only as the bass player ( ethan embry ) ; and the film's center , guy ( tom everett scott ) , the drummer who has aspirations in jazz .
that thing focuses on the wonders , a teen rock band from erie , pennsylvania that is suddenly thrust into the national spotlight in 1964 when they score a major dance hit called , of course , " that thing you do ! "the group's members are , naturally a diverse group : there's brooding lead singer and songwriter jimmy ( johnathon schaech ) ; girl-crazy lenny ( steve zahn ) , the lead guitarist ; a goofy , geeky type known only as the bass player ( ethan embry ) ; and the film's center , guy ( tom everett scott ) , the drummer who has aspirations in jazz .
that thing focuses on the wonders , a teen rock band from erie , pennsylvania that is suddenly thrust into the national spotlight in 1964 when they score a major dance hit called , of course , " that thing you do ! "the group's members are , naturally a diverse group : there's brooding lead singer and songwriter jimmy ( johnathon schaech ) ; girl-crazy lenny ( steve zahn ) , the lead guitarist ; a goofy , geeky type known only as the bass player ( ethan embry ) ; and the film's center , guy ( tom everett scott ) , the drummer who has aspirations in jazz .
that thing you do ! ( r ) tom hanks's screenwriting and directorial debut , that thing you do ! , has all the qualities you would associate with the most beloved screen actor of the moment : fun , lively , and oh-so-nice that thing focuses on the wonders , a teen rock band from erie , pennsylvania that is suddenly thrust into the national spotlight in 1964 when they score a major dance hit called , of course , " that thing you do ! "the group's members are , naturally a diverse group : there's brooding lead singer and songwriter jimmy ( johnathon schaech ) ; girl-crazy lenny ( steve zahn ) , the lead guitarist ; a goofy , geeky type known only as the bass player ( ethan embry ) ; and the film's center , guy ( tom everett scott ) , the drummer who has aspirations in jazz it should come as no surprise that hanks the director works well with the actors , eliciting charming , likable work from the entire cast , most notably hanks lookalike scott and tyler , who is remarkable in delivering the film's biggest and best dramatic moment .
that thing you do ! ( r ) tom hanks's screenwriting and directorial debut , that thing you do ! , has all the qualities you would associate with the most beloved screen actor of the moment : fun , lively , and oh-so-nice .
billy crystal plays wiseguy shrink ben sobol , who new 'patient' happens to be gangster boss paul vitti ( de niro billy crystal , who hasn't had a good role since city slickers way back in the early '90's , is given a role that lets him fully exploit his wiseguy act .
billy crystal plays wiseguy shrink ben sobol , who new 'patient' happens to be gangster boss paul vitti ( de niro robert de niro is hilarious as vitti , playing it dead straight but coming off as really funny robert de niro sobbing is reason enough to watch it , even though it does seem forced , or like a parody ( although i think this was intentional  )crystal is his most likeable in years , kudrow is given as little screen time as possible , which is a good thing , and de niro is just awesome .
 )ben wants nothing to do with vitti , as he's about to get married to laura macnamara ( kudrow ) and having a gangster as a patient wouldn't really help lisa kudrow , barely seen as crystals' estranged wife to be , basically reprises her phoebe role from t  )crystal is his most likeable in years , kudrow is given as little screen time as possible , which is a good thing , and de niro is just awesome .
the supporting cast is apparently made up of the entire cast of casino and goodfellas , and are all funny caricatures , especially vitti's bodyguard jelly ( joe viterelli .
we meet rose ( kate winslet ) , a young woman , who comes from an upper-class family .
we meet jack ( leonardo dicaprio ) , a young man , who comes from a poor financial background , and wins a ticket aboard the titanic , in a poker game .
 the film opens with a woman ( played by laura harring ) about to be killed in a car when a car crash saves her life .
 meanwhile young vivacious betty ( naomi watts ) arrives in hollywood from canada .
 meanwhile local director adam kesher ( justin theroux ) has problems of his own .
 he is trying to cast one actress for his new film and is getting pressure from the producers and from crime figures to cast someone else , cammie rhodes ( melissa george ) .
 there is also a strange character called the cowboy ( monty montgomery ) adding to the confusion .
as the date for independence approaches , he tactically positions himself to be the new nation's first prime minister and defense minister , supporting the presidency of joseph kasa vubu ( maka kotto ) .
 "patrice lumumba's ( eriq ebouaney ) story has been told previously by helmer peck in his 1991 award winning documentary , " lumumba - death of a prophet , " virtually guaranteeing that his new , fictional account of a patriot remains true to its subject high marks go to eriq ebouaney as the title character .
peck , with co-writer pascal bonitzer , begins at the end of the story of the young political leader the situation goes from bad to worse as the army mutinies , the remaining whites begin to evacuate or arm themselves , belgian troops violently intervene , the lucrative katanga province succeeds under the leadership of rival moise tschombe ( pascal nzonzi ) and lumumba is refused access to his own country when he returns from a conference abroad .
it makes the most of a talented but not particularly well-known cast--goran visnjic plays alek with a suave likeability , jonathan tucker shines as the conflicted beau , peter donat is amusing as grandfather hall , and josh lucas has an equally small but effective role as the hapless darby reese .
it makes the most of a talented but not particularly well-known cast--goran visnjic plays alek with a suave likeability , jonathan tucker shines as the conflicted beau , peter donat is amusing as grandfather hall , and josh lucas has an equally small but effective role as the hapless darby reese the film is also lovingly photographed by giles nuttgens and features an evocative score , courtesy peter nashel .
but it owes everything to british actress tilda swinton swinton , whose pale-faced ethereal beauty has graced many of derek jarman's films ( " caravaggio , " " edward ii , " " the last of england " ) , plays margaret hall in " the deep end " and , like charlotte rampling in this year's " under the sand , " turns in a commanding and accomplished performance margaret is a devoted mother who is willing to risk everything to protect the ones she loves , and swinton captures every frustration , every fear , every subtle examination and every fervent realization and every nervous oscillation of her being many can relate to that , of course ; it's the murder cover-up and the blackmail and the fear of losing one's son that swinton so gracefully , so graciously , makes resonate with the truest of colors the end is deep all right , and there isn't a single shallow moment in tilda swinton's canon .
it makes the most of a talented but not particularly well-known cast--goran visnjic plays alek with a suave likeability , jonathan tucker shines as the conflicted beau , peter donat is amusing as grandfather hall , and josh lucas has an equally small but effective role as the hapless darby reese .
it makes the most of a talented but not particularly well-known cast--goran visnjic plays alek with a suave likeability , jonathan tucker shines as the conflicted beau , peter donat is amusing as grandfather hall , and josh lucas has an equally small but effective role as the hapless darby reese .
in this scene , we meet joe flynn ( woody harrelson ) , an american reporter who stops reporting to help a priest carry the mortally wounded mother into a church woody harrelson continues to prove that he is one of the finest , most versatile actors of his generation harrelson plays the cocky celebrity reporter with a heart of gold by allowing the character's caring nature and vulnerability shine through harrelson is equally adept at taking on roles as zany leading men ( cheers , white men can't jump ) as well as excellent supporting roles such as this one .
his fellow reporter is the british michael henderson ( stephen dillane ) stephen dillane is wonderful as henderson dillane avoids making the character overly heroic and preachy it is a wonderful opportunity for dillane after he had to suffer through the denis leary-sandra bullock disaster two if by sea .
during his visits , he befriends a pre-teen girl , emira ( emira nuseric ) who serves as surrogate mother to baby roadrunner he promises to get emira out of harm's way if he gets the chance unfortunately , only babies are wanted for adoption , so henderson pledges to take emira to england .
however , his reporting has grabbed the attention of nina ( marisa tomei ) and her children's aid group that helps to find homes for the yugoslavian orphans .
murray abraham ) , to mess everything up jonathan frakes , who also directed , is funny as commander riker ; a subplot with data ( brent spiner ) discovering his lost childhood is fairly interesting ; and abraham makes a perfect star trek villain , overacting like crazy .
that's when captain picard ( patrick stewart ) steps in : he realizes that moving the ba'ku would kill them ( it also helps that he falls in love with a ba'ku woman ( donna murphy ) ) stewart is bold as always , a magnetic screen presence and perfectly capable of holding an entire film together .
jonathan frakes , who also directed , is funny as commander riker ; a subplot with data ( brent spiner ) discovering his lost childhood is fairly interesting ; and abraham makes a perfect star trek villain , overacting like crazy .
that's when captain picard ( patrick stewart ) steps in : he realizes that moving the ba'ku would kill them ( it also helps that he falls in love with a ba'ku woman ( donna murphy ) ) .
jonathan frakes , who also directed , is funny as commander riker ; a subplot with data ( brent spiner ) discovering his lost childhood is fairly interesting ; and abraham makes a perfect star trek villain , overacting like crazy frakes showed similar aptitude for direction in first contact ; insurrection is an exciting film , with some really attractive special effects and a lot of good action .
 the folks at miramax are obviously trying to capitalize on the rabid `she's all that' craze with their latest project , which has the studdly freddie prinze jr  in strictly textbook fashion , college sophomore and aspiring chef al ( prinze jr  freddie prinze jr  the one mildly clever segment featured winkler and prinze jr .
 ) meets freshman artist imogen ( julia stiles )  and julia stiles are an adorable couple , and when on screen together , they radiate the sort of warmth and charisma that the movie should have centered around .
 zak orth , as the newly realized porn star monk , shows an unmistakable flair with handling all of the film's intelligent dialogue .
 rounding out the impressive ensemble of young talent are shawn hatosy ( `the faculty' ) , selma blair ( `cruel intentions' ) and ashton kutcher ( tv's `that 70's shows' ) .
 rounding out the impressive ensemble of young talent are shawn hatosy ( `the faculty' ) , selma blair ( `cruel intentions' ) and ashton kutcher ( tv's `that 70's shows' ) .
 we hated the tom berenger character in platoon , but he * mattered * , and therefore we were curious to learn about his fate .
here's a concept -- jean-claude van damme gets killed within the first ten minutes of the movie  now if that isn't enough to get you to finally see a van damme movie , i don't know what is  van damme #1 works for the russian mafia in the united states and is killed by some of their operatives  van damme #2 is a police officer in france who finds out that he had a twin brother he never knew about after #1 gets killed in france  this is the typical van damme movie , with jean-claude doing a variety of high end martial arts moves on his opponents  nothing new here , and certainly nothing we haven't seen in every other van damme movie  this is pretty much like every movie that van damme has ever been involved in -- sub par .
 once there , he hooks up with his deceased brother's girlfriend , played by natasha henstridge , and the two of them set out to discover who the murderers are  on the upside , natasha henstridge is in this film , and she does what she did best in species -- she gets naked  we all saw natasha's breasts in species ( although this is one repeat performance i'm not complaining about ) .
 it features a cookie-cutter " i-wanna-please-dada " rameses , who at least is given dignity by the voicework of ralph fiennes ( from schindler's list , among other things ) .
 the film also features an extremely annoying character by way of the " new-improved " miriam , voiced by the ever-antsy sandra bullock , even though the most irritating thing about her is her tendency to burst into song for no apparent reason ( here bullock is replaced by a singing voice ) .
it certainly didn't look that way from the outset , which introduces groom-to-be ben holmes ( ben affleck ) at his bachelor party , surrounded by friends and family whooping over his " last night of freedom .
then , on an ill-fated flight from new york to his wedding in savannah , ben meets sarah lewis ( sandra bullock ) , a free-spirited woman with a string of failed careers and relationships behind her sandra bullock , for her part , is more loose and appealing than she has been in her last half-dozen films combined , avoiding her recent habit of playing any semblance of character depth as moping .
libby parsons ( ashley judd ) has the perfect little life -- a rich husband , a cute son , and a house on the ocean -- but when her husband nick ( bruce greenwood ) takes her sailing , she awakes to find him gone and her hands covered with blood  during their last phone conversation libby hears matty yell " daddy ! " and realizes that her husband is still alive  libby serves six years , growing harder and driven by the desire to kill nick ( based on the theory that because of the " double jeopardy " amendment she can off him with impunity )  after a little breaking and entering and some destruction of property , libby jumps parole and lams it across the country looking for nick and matty  although libby never leaps from a bus that collides with a train , she manages to get into a few nail-biters -- chased down the beach by a jeep , chained to a car that plunges into the ocean , sealed in a coffin -- that add some much needed thrills to an anemic , slow-moving script   ( i think they only made him a former law professor so that he could verify the double-jeopardy theory when libby gets the drop on nick  there's considerable sexual tension between travis and libby ( hey , there's something " the fugitive " didn't have ! ) , but it never goes anywhere  libby is a tv-movie everywoman , but judd's intense performance draws us in and makes us forget that her character has no distinguishing characteristics .
libby parsons ( ashley judd ) has the perfect little life -- a rich husband , a cute son , and a house on the ocean -- but when her husband nick ( bruce greenwood ) takes her sailing , she awakes to find him gone and her hands covered with blood  libby serves six years , growing harder and driven by the desire to kill nick ( based on the theory that because of the " double jeopardy " amendment she can off him with impunity )  after a little breaking and entering and some destruction of property , libby jumps parole and lams it across the country looking for nick and matty   ( i think they only made him a former law professor so that he could verify the double-jeopardy theory when libby gets the drop on nick .
 she's convicted of his murder , of course , and leaves her son matty ( benjamin weir ) with her best friend ( annabeth gish )  time passes , and the friend disappears with matty  during their last phone conversation libby hears matty yell " daddy ! " and realizes that her husband is still alive  after a little breaking and entering and some destruction of property , libby jumps parole and lams it across the country looking for nick and matty .
 she's convicted of his murder , of course , and leaves her son matty ( benjamin weir ) with her best friend ( annabeth gish ) .
 when she gets parole , she's sent to a halfway house run by travis lehman ( tommy lee jones ) , a former law professor who ruined his life with a drunk driving accident  travis pursues , naturally  travis' intriguing backstory is mentioned a couple times but has no effect on the story  there's considerable sexual tension between travis and libby ( hey , there's something " the fugitive " didn't have ! ) , but it never goes anywhere .
 they go from being one newsman blindfolded at the hands of the terrorists to the actual interview with mike wallace ( played by christopher plummer )  also disturbing is the casting of christopher plummer as mike wallace  plummer and wallace are such different types and wallace is too well-known for even so good an actor as plummer to play him convincingly .
 there the news team under producer lowell bergman ( al pacino ) are ordering around the terrorists and getting away with it  al pacino is given top billing but the wigand family is the core of the insider .
 incongruously intercut with the iran interview sequence we see jeffrey wigand ( russell crowe ) dejectedly returning from work to his home .
 rather than support him his wife liane ( diane venora ) demands of him what are they supposed to do for income .
synopsis : in this cultural exploration , a chinese american computer engineer named fang ( peter wang ) decides to take a month-long vacation to visit his sister mrs .
 the story centers on bland marvin ( rob schneider ) , who is an evidence clerk at the local police department that yearns to be a real officer  truthfully , with his bad haircut ( seemingly modeled after weird al yankovic , little richard , and giant poodles ) and his unenthusiastic demeanor , we'd probably throw tomatoes at him just for fun .
 however , marvin is found by an eccentric doctor ( michael caton ) who uses a radical and experimental procedure to save him , implanting our doofus with various animal parts and organs .
 equally tenuous is its other running joke , which involves one of his friends ( guy torry ) who constantly complains that everyone is treating him too nicely because he's black .
quaid stars as a man who has taken up the proffesion of dragonslayer after he feels he is betrayed by a dragon early in the movie he runs into the last dragon in existence , and there is a genuinely amusing battle between the two which results in a standoff where quaid is in the dragons mouth , but has his sword pointed at the dragons brain since he is the last dragon , he will pretend to die and quaid will be able to get paid for it dennis quaid makes a fine hero .
pete posthlewaite provides some ghreat comedy as a monk who journeys with them .
dina meyer is appealing as the sacrificed girl .
connery's voice and ilm team up to provide us with a truly magnificent dragon .
plot : jet li is a chinese cop asked to help some french policemen nab a bad guy critique : very cool !now here's a movie that gives you exactly what you're looking for , if what you're looking for is kickass action , a palpable good cop/bad cop story line , some hardcore stunts and jet li slam-dunking everyone in sight !the film also moves fast ( a mere 95 minutes ) , develops a certain " cute " chemistry between fonda and li , has nice surroundings ( paris , baby ! ) and gives us one of the best bad guys that i've seen all year anyway , other than him , jet li also handled his " acting " pretty well in this film , with very little real dialogue to say , but enough to make us believe his character we go to see jet li movies because we want to see jet li kicking a lot of ass from side to side , and this film delivers gangbusters on that front one thing that i would definitely recommend is , as jet li pointed out himself on his website , that you leave the kids at home for this one .
tcheky karyo is the devil incarnate in this film .
the happy bastard's 30-second reviewbig daddyhappy gilmore as a father ?of course !that's the latest scenario presented by adam sandler in the new movie big daddy , a movie that's passable but isn't really considered some of sandler's best work he even manages to use the kid in a sort of con game to get the attention of a beautiful law office worker ( joey lauren adams ) , but , somehow , he also garners the attention of social services , who aren't particularly pleased with coufax's actions , as he pretends to be his roommate to keep the kid the reason i say it's not really sandler's best work is because it gets really sappy towards the end of a movie , showing some odd feelings that somehow didn't really belong in a sandler vehicle i mean , it fits the movie's tone and everything , and sandler handles it well , but it's just oddly placed , that's all sandler does a good job here , as he does in most of his movies stewart , in his minor time on screen , is great , and adams remains a joy to watch .
his girlfriend ( kristy swanson ) is fed up with his lifestyle and demands a change before she leaves him .
enter a 5-year old kid , who's mysteriously dropped at his doorstep and intended for his preppy roommate ( jon stewart ) , who's off in china on a business trip stewart , in his minor time on screen , is great , and adams remains a joy to watch .
he even manages to use the kid in a sort of con game to get the attention of a beautiful law office worker ( joey lauren adams ) , but , somehow , he also garners the attention of social services , who aren't particularly pleased with coufax's actions , as he pretends to be his roommate to keep the kid stewart , in his minor time on screen , is great , and adams remains a joy to watch .
rob schneider , however , is irritating as his friend , an immigrant delivery boy who can't read .
 with director peter medak , whose previous credits include the good films let him have it and the krays , and top-notch character actors gary oldman and lena olin , they seemed likely to be a successful combination  gary oldman plays jack grimaldi , a good cop turned bad , selling information to the mob and cheating on his wife  gary oldman's performance is disappointingly weak ; he seems nearly bored .
 with director peter medak , whose previous credits include the good films let him have it and the krays , and top-notch character actors gary oldman and lena olin , they seemed likely to be a successful combination  demarkov , played by lena olin , is a tough but tremendously sexy woman with seemingly no problems maneuvering within the mob world  what a woman ! lena olin's performance is the only glimmer in this dismal film .
 anabella sciorra is wasted in her role as romeo's wife .
paul newman stars as retired detective harry ross .
harry has spent the last couple of years doing odd jobs for jack and catherine ames ( gene hackman and susan sarandon ) , a pair of married actors who have fallen from the limelight .
harry has spent the last couple of years doing odd jobs for jack and catherine ames ( gene hackman and susan sarandon ) , a pair of married actors who have fallen from the limelight .
giancarlo esposito appears as harry's bumbling detective protigi , and john spencer is a suspicious police captain .
james garner plays raymond hope , a former cop and one of harry's best friends .
the lead role is played by 3 different actors , with the teenage-david ( taylor ) and adult-david ( rush ) standing out taylor's teenage-david is the more sympathy producing role .
the lead role is played by 3 different actors , with the teenage-david ( taylor ) and adult-david ( rush ) standing out whilst rush is known for his tv work in australia , i think this is his first major cinema work the 'miming' of the actors piano playing is faultless ( apparently rush didn't mime ; he really did play )helfgott's life is certainly not without it's sympathetic people .
a famous game designer , allegra geller ( a fine looking jennifer jason leigh ) , flees a demonstration of her latest game , existenz , after an assassination attempt .
that someone friendly is her dubious companion and security guard , ted pikul ( jude law ) .
 the twilight murders , another one from the series , is dealing with the case of gordon kahl ( played by rod steiger ) , old farmer from north dakota who would rather spend a year in prison than pay taxes to the despised u  on the other hand , film is steadily directed by dick lowry , and rod steiger does good job potraying gordon kahl .
 that brings fbi on the scene , and agent mayberly ( michael gross ) is supervising the manhunt  on the other hand , michael gross as his pursuer is quite wooden and his interaction with some of the actors is terrible .
 tommy lee jones returns to his role as chief deputy samuel gerard , the grizzly cop who was after harrison ford in the fugitive  tommy lee jones is as fine as ever , although his role is hardly a challenge .
after a three-year engagement to fellow teacher emily montgomery ( joan cusack ) , a wedding date has been set , and the hubbub surrounding it is almost as big as that surrounding another huge story - greenleaf high graduate cameron drake ( matt dillon ) is up for a best actor oscar .
after a three-year engagement to fellow teacher emily montgomery ( joan cusack ) , a wedding date has been set , and the hubbub surrounding it is almost as big as that surrounding another huge story - greenleaf high graduate cameron drake ( matt dillon ) is up for a best actor oscar .
naturally the questions pour from howard's fiancee , parents ( debbie reynolds & wilford brimley ) , students , and the high school's principal , tom halliwell ( bob newhart ) , and the evidence starts to become more and more obvious : howard is clean , neat , honest , sincere , a romantic , and perhaps the most incriminating fact , he loves barbara streisand dillon has never been so likeable , cusack has never seemed so perfect for a role , and brimley , reynolds , and newhart all provide huge laughs when they're up to bat .
naturally the questions pour from howard's fiancee , parents ( debbie reynolds & wilford brimley ) , students , and the high school's principal , tom halliwell ( bob newhart ) , and the evidence starts to become more and more obvious : howard is clean , neat , honest , sincere , a romantic , and perhaps the most incriminating fact , he loves barbara streisand .
one particular reporter is peter malloy ( tom selleck ) of " inside entertainment " , who unlike the collage of other reporters , wants to spend a whole week in the life of howard brackett , including coverage of his wedding .
matt damon stars as mike mcdermott , a 20-something law student in present-day new york city who tells us how the game of poker is really played .
presently we know he has a girlfriend named jo ( gretchen mol ) who he constantly argues with over his gambling .
one scene demonstrates this perfectly in which mike is told by a judge ( martin landou , in a perfectly cast and performed role ) that destiny is everything and yet nothing at the same time .
 that's an accurate reflection of what aberdeen strives for , focusing on the pairing of an alcoholic father , tomas ( skarsg ? rd ) and his alienated , openly hostile yuppie daughter , kaisa ( lena headey , gossip )  if lena headey were a stronger actress , perhaps aberdeen could have been able to coast on the performances and moody , haunting cinematography ( rendering norway into its own pastoral ghost world -- the reference to a certain superior american indie flick intentional )  headey's too busy acting , using her face and furrowed brow to convey every last twitch of insouciance .
 it's worthwhile to compare aberdeen to an earlier film released in 2001 , jonathan nossiter's captivating signs & wonders  nossiter's film thoroughly explores this neurotic territory in addition to delving into the americanization of greece and the use of mysticism as an illusion to deflect pain .
coinciding with the emerging popularity of movies that deal with anything related to serial killers , relentless , 1989 low budget thriller about lapd detective sam dietz , played by character actor leo rossi , spawned three more sequels  the actors are good , though - leo rossi is fine as usual , and william forsythe plays one of more compelling villains in his career .
 the actors are good , though - leo rossi is fine as usual , and william forsythe plays one of more compelling villains in his career .
 signy coleman as dietz's love interest , is , on the other hand , quite miscast .
living in a concentration camp-like atmosphere , they are led by one plucky hen called ginger ( voice of julia sawalha ) who continually comes up with plans for escape -- and always gets caught , subsequently spending day after day in the coal box ginger is perfect , spunky and opinionated , but with a soft heart that forbids her to leave her companions behind , and julia sawalha ( known as the cute mousy girl on " absolutely fabulous " ) nails it .
one night , a brash american rooster flies in over the fence , calling himself rocky ( mel gibson ) , famous flying rooster and circus performer rocky promises to teach the chickens how to fly , and the situation grows more desperate as the nefarious mrs even if you have no idea who mel gibson is , rocky remains an interesting character she has warm , human chemistry with gibson , whose rocky hides his personal doubt under a brash gung-ho veneer .
the chickens at tweedy's farm are up to something  tweedy ( miranda richardson ) decides to abandon the farm's egg-selling plan for a pie-selling plan  tweedy ( tony haygarth ) suspects the chickens are organizing in some way , but his limited intellect prevents him from figuring things out , and his overbearing wife certainly isn't any help .
robert de niro headlines this cast of noteworthies in a performance that is the most outstanding of his in quite some time .
he takes command and offers much gravity as the ex-spy sam , a man who's called to france to help a shady operations controller named dierdre ( natascha mcelhone ) recover a package .
at times , however , zeik's tale becomes almost too reminiscent of mission : impossible - de niro might easily become tom cruise , the package might become cruise's computer disk .
the film starts with the invasion of ancient china by the huns , led by the imposing shan-yu ( miguel ferrer ) .
soon , china's emperor ( pat morita ) mobilizes his armies and decrees that one male from each family in the country shall serve to fight in china's defense .
when the fa family is served notice , it is the elderly father , fa zhou ( soon-tek oh ) who must answer the call , as there are no other males in the household  "a wonderful range of performances delight the audience throughout the film , varying from the straight , such as soon-tek oh as fa zhou , to the comical , such as harvey fierstein as yao , a gruff , pugilistic member of shang's conscripted army .
fearing her father will surely be killed in battle , fa mulan ( ming-na wen ) disguises herself as a man and sneaks off with the royal orders to join the chinese army .
even more outrageous is eddie murphy as mushu , the diminutive guardian dragon sent to look after mulan although an obvious attempt to relive the chemistry brought forth by robin williams in aladdin , murphy nevertheless distinguishes himself with his own winning performance .
 " mathematics is the language of the universe , " insists genius protagonist maximillian cohen ( sean gullette ) in a cool , mantra-like voice-over which repeats throughout the picture .
annie wilson ( cate blanchett ) , a widow who struggles to raise her children in a small town in georgia is asked for help by local authorities in solving the case of a missing woman .
 in an ultra conservative backwoods town will her testimony based on her psychic visions hold up in court ? do they even have the right man ? what's good about it : aside from keanu reeves giving one of the best performances of his career as the loathable redneck donnie barksdale , there is little else going for the film .
things aren't going well for jackie brown ( pam grier )  grier wordlessly striding through the lax , funky music blaring away on the speakers , is emblematic of films of that era of course , nothing in the film screams 1970s more than the casting of pam grier and robert forster as the two leads , and although the caper intrigue is fun to watch as the plot twists , backstabbing , and deceptions deliciously unfold , the strength of jackie brown is the quiet , understated relationship developed between jackie and max ; when they kiss , it's perhaps the most tender scene of the year much press has been given about the casting of blaxploitation-era icon pam grier in the lead , with the wags buzzing that mr  grier is solid in the film's title role , although nothing here forces her to test her range .
she's 44 years old , stuck at a dead-end job ( " $16 , 000 a year , plus retirement benefits that aren't worth a damn " ) as a flight attendant for the worst airline in north america -- and she's just been caught at the airport by atf agent ray nicolette ( portrayed with terrific childlike enthusiasm by michael keaton ) and police officer mark dargus ( michael bowen ) smuggling $50 000 from mexico for gun-runner ordell robbie ( samuel l .
she's 44 years old , stuck at a dead-end job ( " $16 , 000 a year , plus retirement benefits that aren't worth a damn " ) as a flight attendant for the worst airline in north america -- and she's just been caught at the airport by atf agent ray nicolette ( portrayed with terrific childlike enthusiasm by michael keaton ) and police officer mark dargus ( michael bowen ) smuggling $50 000 from mexico for gun-runner ordell robbie ( samuel l  jackson ) , who has her bailed out by unassuming bail bondsman max cherry ( robert forster ) .
 jackson ) , who has her bailed out by unassuming bail bondsman max cherry ( robert forster ) the loquacious ordell , based out of a hermosa beach house where his horny , bong-hitting surfer girl melanie ( bridget fonda ) and agreeable crony louis gara ( robert de niro ) hang out , operates under the policy that the best rat is a dead rat , and he's soon out to silence jackie brown of course , nothing in the film screams 1970s more than the casting of pam grier and robert forster as the two leads , and although the caper intrigue is fun to watch as the plot twists , backstabbing , and deceptions deliciously unfold , the strength of jackie brown is the quiet , understated relationship developed between jackie and max ; when they kiss , it's perhaps the most tender scene of the year  forster's nuanced , understated performance is the best in the film ; he creates an amiable character of such poignancy that when he gazes at jackie , we smile along with him  forster .
the loquacious ordell , based out of a hermosa beach house where his horny , bong-hitting surfer girl melanie ( bridget fonda ) and agreeable crony louis gara ( robert de niro ) hang out , operates under the policy that the best rat is a dead rat , and he's soon out to silence jackie brown .
nicolas cage is seth , a guardian angel who , like hundreds ( likely thousands or even millions ) of other angels , spends eternity watching over the citizens of mortality ; humans never aware of how much celestial intervention occurs in their life cage is a wonderfully versatile actor ( think face/off , raising arizona , and it could happen to you - what a combo ! ) who slips into the role of a heavenly agent quite nicely but threatens sappiness more than once .
meg ryan , in her most subdued performance yet , plays maggie , a doctor who begins to ponder exactly who it is we're fighting against when we fight to keep someone alive it's nice to see ryan pick up roles like this and the one in courage under fire the two aren't very comparable to each other , but they both deviate from her usual " intelligently ditzy " romantic comedy roles , and it's an impressive side of ryan movie goers rarely have the chance to enjoy .
but even though the two leads do an impressive job , it is dennis franz who grabs us with his interpretation of a hospital patient who knows more than meets the eye .
robin williams is a comedic genus  professor phillip brainard ( williams ) is a terminally forgetful scientist teaching at a small college  at one point , my son looked around the audience and asked " why are these people laughing ? " although williams turns in one of his least inspired roles , he is easily the most lively of the actors .
 his fiancee , sara jean reynolds ( marcia gay harden ) , president of the college is none too happy with him because he's left her waiting at the altar due to his lack of short-term -- and long-term -- memory .
 brainard realizes the commercial potential within the goo can save the school from bankruptcy and being taken over by the town's evil industrialist charles hoenicker ( raymond barry ) .
senseless ( r ) marlon wayans is a very talented physical comedian , and it is that gift that brings senseless moments of life  comes to an end , the genuinely funny marlon wayans has a promising big-screen future ahead of him .
 any attempt at anything more substantial than broad comedy fizzles--darryl's romance with janice ( tamara taylor ) , a young woman who yearns for a man who is true to himself , does not generate sparks of any kind .
while watching wes anderson's rushmore , it may be surprising to think that the role of max fischer , the film's anti-hero , was not written with jason schwartzman in mind .
on the brink of being thrown out , he lands himself in even more hot water when he falls for first grade teacher rosemary cross ( olivia williams ) and enlists the help of millionaire acquaintance herman blume ( the great bill murray ) to build an aquarium ( on rushmore's baseball field ) in her honour .
on the brink of being thrown out , he lands himself in even more hot water when he falls for first grade teacher rosemary cross ( olivia williams ) and enlists the help of millionaire acquaintance herman blume ( the great bill murray ) to build an aquarium ( on rushmore's baseball field ) in her honour bill murray is his equal as blume , displaying a depth we haven't yet seen from him .
starring ben stiller , elizabeth hurley , maria bello , janeane garofalo screenplay by david veloz , based on the novel by jerry stahl directed by david veloz permanent midnight is a pretty bad movie , though it took me a few days to conclude this  ben stiller plays stahl , a young author who arrives in l  permanent midnight is structured mostly as a flashback , with recovering addict bello meeting stiller ( at a fastfood restaurant , where stiller works the drive-thru as part of rehab ) , taking him back to a hotel , and between bouts of serious screwing , listening to his life story  i've spent the last week trying to figure out why stiller never seemed to find the frighteningly gorgeous hurley attractive-worse , i've been trying to figure out why hurley did find stiller attractive  as stahl , stiller displays none of the charm or wit one would expect ( post-there's something about mary ) of either the actor or a comedy writer  watch stahl shoot heroin next to a baby ! watch stahl spoil numerous pitch meetings with smack-fueled babble ! stiller gives a technically flawless performance : the film could double as a documentary on how to be a junkie  so , basically , his drug habit got him a book deal , a movie based on his life , and now he's apparently collaborating with stiller on future projects .
starring ben stiller , elizabeth hurley , maria bello , janeane garofalo screenplay by david veloz , based on the novel by jerry stahl directed by david veloz permanent midnight is a pretty bad movie , though it took me a few days to conclude this  chompers ( a thinly veiled stand-in for " alf " : chompers looks just like alf except he's blue ) , marries a producer ( hurley ) so she can get a green card , and hooks up with a spanish mother ( liz torres ) , who shoots heroin with him in the afternoons  i've spent the last week trying to figure out why stiller never seemed to find the frighteningly gorgeous hurley attractive-worse , i've been trying to figure out why hurley did find stiller attractive .
starring ben stiller , elizabeth hurley , maria bello , janeane garofalo screenplay by david veloz , based on the novel by jerry stahl directed by david veloz permanent midnight is a pretty bad movie , though it took me a few days to conclude this  chompers ( a thinly veiled stand-in for " alf " : chompers looks just like alf except he's blue ) , marries a producer ( hurley ) so she can get a green card , and hooks up with a spanish mother ( liz torres ) , who shoots heroin with him in the afternoons .
starring ben stiller , elizabeth hurley , maria bello , janeane garofalo screenplay by david veloz , based on the novel by jerry stahl directed by david veloz permanent midnight is a pretty bad movie , though it took me a few days to conclude this  permanent midnight is structured mostly as a flashback , with recovering addict bello meeting stiller ( at a fastfood restaurant , where stiller works the drive-thru as part of rehab ) , taking him back to a hotel , and between bouts of serious screwing , listening to his life story  when the movie poses the question will stahl be saved ? and then answers it in the form of bello's character ( basically a shrink in black panties ) , could a person care less ? in the film version of his autobiography of the same name , stahl doesn't need saving , he needs someone who will sit there and listen to him go on about himself .
starring ben stiller , elizabeth hurley , maria bello , janeane garofalo screenplay by david veloz , based on the novel by jerry stahl directed by david veloz permanent midnight is a pretty bad movie , though it took me a few days to conclude this .
 the film opens in a quaint cornish seaside village at the funeral of the husband of a middle-aged woman , grace ( brenda blethyn ) , who fell out of an airplane , evidently committing suicide  there are a lot of silly giggles that come forth and the film has just enough of an acting performance by brenda blethyn to breathe air into it before it comes to its belated finale , as it drones on with its transparently gratuitous upbeat tone , until it makes the audience feel good that the sweet old lady succeeded .
 the film moves into the formula mode , whereas grace beats the odds against her failing to survive , as she meets an international drug dealer , a frenchman ( tcheky karyo ) , who is first seen threatening to cut off her fingers but later becomes her business partner and husband as she becomes a millionaire and writes a best selling fiction book about her experiences , thereby becoming a celebrity .
 the locals all let the illegal activities go on undisturbed : the police sergeant ( campbell ) pretends not to notice what the bright lights in grace's greenhouse is for , the friendly vicar ( phillips ) counsels about the wisdom of not taking action over something that you can't control , and the doctor ( clunes ) enjoys smoking the weed for recreation .
 her gardener and handyman , matthew ( ferguson ) , decides to stay on with her , despite his last check bouncing .
 the locals all let the illegal activities go on undisturbed : the police sergeant ( campbell ) pretends not to notice what the bright lights in grace's greenhouse is for , the friendly vicar ( phillips ) counsels about the wisdom of not taking action over something that you can't control , and the doctor ( clunes ) enjoys smoking the weed for recreation .
 sandra hess ( playing the sonya blade character ) is particularly execrable , especially in scenes where she tries to convince us that she loved johnny cage ( a character from the first movie who gets greased at the beginning of this movie )  in that case , the following critiques also apply :  * sandra hess , while being an even worse actress than bridgette wilson ( who played sonya blade in the first movie ) , is much more convincing as a fighter  hess looks like she actually knows some martial arts , and puts together a much more believable fight scene .
 the mortals won , and in theory this should have prevented the emperor shao khan from taking over the earth   * there are a number of completely meaningless story sidetracks , including a muddled scene where liu kang ( robin shou ) seeks out nightwolf ( litefoot ) , has a mystical hallucination , and then wanders off with jade ( irina pantaeva ) .
 assigned to do an evaluation on powell is a bright ( or so we are told ) young psychiatrist theo caulder ( cuba gooding jr  oscar winner cuba gooding jr .
 instinct's plot is brimming with potential : world-renowned anthropologist ethan powell ( anthony hopkins ) disappeared for two years whilst doing research in the jungles of africa  i think that anthony hopkins is one of the greatest screen actors , and he chews the scenery in this movie , brilliant as ever .
 and then there's the inevitable " heartless meanie " character , in the form of donald sutherland who plays caulder's mentor .
it tells the story of jude ( christopher eccleston - the psychotic accountant from " shallow grave " ) - a simple , dim-witted young man with big dreams christopher eccleston ( slightly resembling richard edson with his new look and dumb expression ) plays jude wonderfully , sometimes bringing a big dumb smile to his face , and making him kind of child-like at other times .
another reason for going to this town was because someone in his family lives there : sue ( kate winslet ) , his cousin and a very intelligent but kinda mischevious young woman who wants to be a school teacher kate winslet , in a pre- " titanic " performance , is brilliant , nailing every psyche of her character , and creating someone who's troubled but very seductive with her personality kate may be the best actress in her age group ( if you don't believe me , see " titanic , " branagh's " hamlet , " " sense and sensibility , " and " heavenly creatures , " the latter one being my favorite performance of hers ) .
in its bleak , foreboding opening , shot in grainy black and white , he gets a lesson from phillotson ( liam cunningham ) , his teacher : as they stand upon a mountain , looking upon a city in the distance , he says all you have to do is work hard and you can have anything in the world in the supporting roles , liam cunningham is a wonderfully flawed teacher , exposing all his bad parts , but ultimately being a pretty good person ; and rachel griffiths is wonderfully immature as jude's wife , whom he never divorces .
after marrying and divorcing an immature woman named arabella ( rachel griffiths ) because they frolicked in the hay ( literally ) but did not ultimately share anything in common , he moves away to a town with a giant university , with a chance to learn more , and get ahead in life in the supporting roles , liam cunningham is a wonderfully flawed teacher , exposing all his bad parts , but ultimately being a pretty good person ; and rachel griffiths is wonderfully immature as jude's wife , whom he never divorces .
 among these are leo biederman ( elijah wood ) and sarah hotchner ( leelee sobieski )  elijah wood also comes off rather successfully , but he still hasn't had many good roles ( wood , stick to drama ! you are too talented for this stuff ) .
 among these are leo biederman ( elijah wood ) and sarah hotchner ( leelee sobieski )  leelee sobieski could have been better , but i think she just suffered from a poorly written character .
 we are then introduced to jenny lerner ( t ? a leoni ) , a reporter for msnbc  t ? a leoni ( bad boys , tv's " the naked truth " ) is the best of the film , and she is given the meatiest role  her character is made stronger by leoni's presence , and we grow to care for her .
 she gets handed a job to investigate a possible cover-up in the government involving senator alan rittenhouse ( james cromwell )  costing nearly $75 million , with special effects done by the illustrious ilm ( which is a huge shocker ) , and with a score composed by oscar-winner james horner ( titanic ) , one might have expected this to be more fun to witness and experience .
 they take her in to meet the president of the united states , president beck ( morgan freeman )  morgan freeman has been infinitely better than this , and gives one of his most shallow performances to date ( which is quite remarkable for him ) .
it stars tobey maguire and reese witherspoon as two nineties teenagers who , through quite a bit of luck , find themselves zapped into a fifties sitcom named " pleasantville  "maguire , as the reserved bud parker , is perfect for the pseudo-world ; but the rebellious mary sue ( witherspoon ) is not at all made for the father-knows-best times maguire and witherspoon are effective as the leads , but the true complements go out to jeff daniels and j .
it stars tobey maguire and reese witherspoon as two nineties teenagers who , through quite a bit of luck , find themselves zapped into a fifties sitcom named " pleasantville  "maguire , as the reserved bud parker , is perfect for the pseudo-world ; but the rebellious mary sue ( witherspoon ) is not at all made for the father-knows-best times maguire and witherspoon are effective as the leads , but the true complements go out to jeff daniels and j .
 johnson ( jeff daniels ) and at the other end is a close-minded mayor ( j maguire and witherspoon are effective as the leads , but the true complements go out to jeff daniels and j daniels brings an atmosphere of awe , inspiration , and hope to his character , whereas walsh simply drips of sinister closemindedness - almost to the point where you can sense gene hackman's envy for daniels , it's his most commendable performance of the last three years - or more - and for walsh , it's a complementary exclamation point on a fine career .
soon hues of color creep into the black and white world , and while some embrace the change in the passion of realism , others fear the strangeness daniels brings an atmosphere of awe , inspiration , and hope to his character , whereas walsh simply drips of sinister closemindedness - almost to the point where you can sense gene hackman's envy .
 suspicions escalate , as issac o'day ( delroy lindo ) is told of the murder  delro lindo as issac o'day carries himself well in the film  lindo turns out the films best performance .
 now we can add two other hong kong filmmakers to the mix with star jet li and director and fight choreographer corey yuen kwai  the scene shifts to a prison in china , where han sing ( jet li ) learns of his brothers murder  the relationship between jet li's han and aaliyah's trish o'day reminds us of abel ferrera's " china girl " , except that romeo must die's couple never once exchange more than a loving glance towards one another  jet li is a master of these intricate physical battles  here , jet is given the opportunity to show off in a way that " lethal weapon 4 " ( jet's u  unfortunately , a lot of jet's fights are aided with computer effects that detract from his ability and precision  jet li is a grand and personable screen presence .
 and of course the common practice of one character being the comic relief of the film becomes painfully obvious here as anthony anderson as allayah's bodyguard , maurice has no comic timing whatsoever .
 the relationship between jet li's han and aaliyah's trish o'day reminds us of abel ferrera's " china girl " , except that romeo must die's couple never once exchange more than a loving glance towards one another .
 it's not until club owner silk ( rapper dmx ) , bears down on kai and his henchmen that the fight ends .
 this promising story of an ordinary person doing the extraordinary is burdened from the outset by casting : the " ordinary person " in question , jakob heym , is played by robin williams  i am of the depressing opinion that williams is growing less assured as an actor in his " serious " roles with every passing year  jakob the liar depends on the notion that jakob has to struggle to craft his fictions , but williams always looks like he's struggling _not_ to craft them  there are just too many things going on that prove distracting , whether it's the sketchy romanctic angle involving liev schreiber as an earnest former prizefighter , or williams' incongrous presence , or a sweet but utterly irrelevant little girl .
 when he improvises a radio address by winston churchill for ailing 10-year-old orphan lina ( hannah taylor gordon ) , he seems relieved that he can finally get wacky .
 director peter kassovitz , working from jurek becker's novel , crafts some nice scenes between jakob and the other townspeople , and draws solid performances from armin mueller-stahl ( as a once-revered doctor ) and bob balaban ( as a barber drifting into depression ) .
 director peter kassovitz , working from jurek becker's novel , crafts some nice scenes between jakob and the other townspeople , and draws solid performances from armin mueller-stahl ( as a once-revered doctor ) and bob balaban ( as a barber drifting into depression ) .
 when he improvises a radio address by winston churchill for ailing 10-year-old orphan lina ( hannah taylor gordon ) , he seems relieved that he can finally get wacky  there are just too many things going on that prove distracting , whether it's the sketchy romanctic angle involving liev schreiber as an earnest former prizefighter , or williams' incongrous presence , or a sweet but utterly irrelevant little girl .
starring johnny depp , christina ricci , and casper van dien johnny depp , a veteran tim burton actor who has appeared both in ed wood and edward scissorhands , plays ichabod crane , who has apparently changed occupations from irving's original story and is now an investigator .
starring johnny depp , christina ricci , and casper van dien equally adequate is christina ricci , who plays the love interest in the film .
starring johnny depp , christina ricci , and casper van dien .
inspired by the short story the legend of sleepy hollow by washington irving special appearances by christopher lee and christopher walken synopsis : investigator ichabod crane journeys to 1799 sleepy hollow to investigate a series of murders involving decapitation sleepy hollow , his newest feature which fans have been anticipating for a while , shares the similar dark and atmospheric style of his earlier work and counts among his better movies sleepy hollow quite obviously draws its inspiration from the old period horror films of the 1950s and 1960s , especially hammer studios' reworkings of dracula and frankenstein , and american international's series of movies based on the works of edgar allan poe christopher lee , in fact , star of many hammer productions over the years , appears at the beginning of sleepy hollow as a judge who sends ichabod crane out to investigate the murders one of the few weak parts of sleepy hollow is the wooden and cliched dialogue between the main characters walker is quickly becoming one of the premiere suspense writers in hollywood , and sleepy hollow certainly doesn't hurt his growing reputation as one might imagine from a gentleman like walker , sleepy hollow is quite graphic if you're looking for a good scare , however , sleepy hollow is definately recommended .
special appearances by christopher lee and christopher walken christopher lee , in fact , star of many hammer productions over the years , appears at the beginning of sleepy hollow as a judge who sends ichabod crane out to investigate the murders .
the characters continue that turn : our two leads are simon birch ( ian michael smith ) and joe wenteworth ( joseph mazzello ) in a wonderfully executed performance by ian michael smith , simon birch is convinced that he's god's instrument , and there must be a reason he's so small .
the characters continue that turn : our two leads are simon birch ( ian michael smith ) and joe wenteworth ( joseph mazzello ) .
joe is the bastard son of rebecca ( ashley judd ) , and by age twelve he's ready to know who is father is .
early on , the two meet up with ben goodrich ( oliver platt ) , rebecca's new boyfriend , and although the bond isn't immediate , ben and the two boys develop a liking for each other .
finally , jim carrey gives a cameo as the adult joe in the present day , and his few minutes here are relatively more impressive than his entire performance in the truman show .
as it is , i found american history x to be an extremely good film , not just because of tony kaye's focused look at the touchy subject of racism , but because of a powerful , charismatic performance from edward norton it's hard to believe that it has only been two years since norton's fantastic role in primal fear , but , here he is now , starring in his own film and making himself a star norton is one of those performers who becomes his character , and his work in american history x is one of the very best performances this year he plays a young man named derek vinyard , a skinhead living in venice beach with his brother , danny ( edward furlong ) , mother ( beverly d'angelo ) , and sister , davin ( jennifer lien ) of course , it helps that kaye has an actor as talented as norton to play this part it's astonishing how frightening norton looks with a shaved head and a swastika on his chest in addition to getting the look just right , he's perfect for this role -- derek requires intelligence , depth , and a whole lot of shouting , and norton does it all with ease .
as it is , i found american history x to be an extremely good film , not just because of tony kaye's focused look at the touchy subject of racism , but because of a powerful , charismatic performance from edward norton he plays a young man named derek vinyard , a skinhead living in venice beach with his brother , danny ( edward furlong ) , mother ( beverly d'angelo ) , and sister , davin ( jennifer lien ) the other performances are all terrific , with standouts from furlong , d'angelo , and lien .
he plays a young man named derek vinyard , a skinhead living in venice beach with his brother , danny ( edward furlong ) , mother ( beverly d'angelo ) , and sister , davin ( jennifer lien ) the other performances are all terrific , with standouts from furlong , d'angelo , and lien .
he plays a young man named derek vinyard , a skinhead living in venice beach with his brother , danny ( edward furlong ) , mother ( beverly d'angelo ) , and sister , davin ( jennifer lien ) the other performances are all terrific , with standouts from furlong , d'angelo , and lien .
what adds depth to the story is a subplot in which the principal of danny's school ( avery brooks ) becomes obsessed with purging the hatred from danny .
one would think that david duchovny , star of the cult favorite " x-files " would be very careful in choosing his leading man cinema roles .
 smalltime hoodlum raymond blossom ( timothy hutton ) is impressed with the cutlery skills on his associate .
 sand's temptation is that this will give him a chance to practice medicine again albeit illegally , big chunks of cash to fuel his habit and close proximity to the gangster's womanfriend claire ( angelina jolie ) , this film's babe factor .
 one of blossom's henchmen steals a few moments of the show as a quirky gunman reminiscent of val kilmer's doc holliday in " tombstone " .
 tarzan the ape man ( casper van dien ) several days before his marriage to lady jane porter ( jane march )  its patently obvious that casper van dien ( one of the pretty-boy heroes of starship troopers ) was not hired on the basis of his acting ability  weismuller made 12 tarzan features ; van dien will probably fall 11 short of that number .
 tarzan the ape man ( casper van dien ) several days before his marriage to lady jane porter ( jane march )  with lady jane following close behind , he returns to the jungle where he was born  jane march , on the other hand , has to keep her shirt on , which may be a first for her  some six years ago , march give a solid performance in jean jacques annaud's steamy the lover  march may be attractive , but , at least judging by this performance , she can't act  the romantic elements are all contrived ? in fact , lady jane's presence is necessary only so she can be captured and subsequently rescued by her buff fiance .
 meanwhile , in central africa , the dastardly nigel ravens ( steven waddington ) , a self-proclaimed scholar and explorer , believes he has found the way to the lost city of opar , which he calls the cradle of civilization  with his plastic facial expressions , monotone voice , and complete inability to make convincing animal noises , his range rivals that of steven seagal  meanwhile , steven waddington has serious trouble summoning up the menace necessary to be a really detestable bad guy .
 meanwhile , in central africa , the dastardly nigel ravens ( steven waddington ) , a self-proclaimed scholar and explorer , believes he has found the way to the lost city of opar , which he calls the cradle of civilization  with his plastic facial expressions , monotone voice , and complete inability to make convincing animal noises , his range rivals that of steven seagal  meanwhile , steven waddington has serious trouble summoning up the menace necessary to be a really detestable bad guy .
 since then , she made the career-killing decision of appearing opposite bruce willis in the color of night , which exploited her every acting defiency .
 even gary sinise and tim robbins can't muster enough emotion to convince us they are breathing .
 even gary sinise and tim robbins can't muster enough emotion to convince us they are breathing .
 alicia silverstone is completely wasted playing jennifer , the babysitter .
 her co-workers ( molly shannon , john c .
 her co-workers ( molly shannon , john c  reilly and gary marshall ) are in terminal hyper-drive .
 reilly and gary marshall ) are in terminal hyper-drive .
 the comedy is supposed to progress when drew's younger brother ( played with zest by david arquette ) reenlists to jump-start his baseball career .
i'm currently accepting all future names for drew barrymore characters  drew barrymore is a copy editor at the chicago sun times who gets her big break as a reporter , only it's very clear from the onset that she lacks the toughness and the pushy extravertedness that marks the best of reporters  the irony is that drew's character , was such a dweeb first time around , that she is terrified at going back  what works : drew's geeky old-self  what doesn't work : drew's geeky new-self  the comedy is supposed to progress when drew's younger brother ( played with zest by david arquette ) reenlists to jump-start his baseball career  if you see the film , you'd know what i'm talking about : drew walks into a bar , has her hand stamped , and over the night associates with some rastafarians with some delicious , um , cake .
 in spite of game efforts by kevin bacon and matt dillon , who manage to sustain straight faces throughout the ordeal , " wild things " not once jells in its eroticism , unpredictability , character motivation , sense of the world , plot , etc  directed by john mcnaughton ( " henry : portrait of a serial killer " ) , " wild things " follows sam lombardo ( matt dillon ) , a hunkish , suburban florida high school teacher who's the dream of every spruced up female in the community .
 in spite of game efforts by kevin bacon and matt dillon , who manage to sustain straight faces throughout the ordeal , " wild things " not once jells in its eroticism , unpredictability , character motivation , sense of the world , plot , etc  there's the ambiguous cop ( kevin bacon , who also executive produced ) who sniffs something iffy in this concoction of deceit , murder and lust  and in what has to be one of the most flabbergastingly inept scenes that has graced this country , kevin bacon's member makes a cameo appearance with ten minutes to go .
 kelly van ryan ( denise richards ) adores him to such extent that she offers to wash his jeep with a partner .
 even bill murray gets into the act as lombardo's zany lawyer  he wears a fake neck- brace , waves the finger at the other client and infuses the script with some billy murray  you can tell mcnaughton knew he had nothing to lose assigning murray to this role .
 a second accuser comes front , suzie toller ( neve campbell ) , a booze-drinkin' , tattooed piece of trailer trash that charges lombardo of sexually molesting her , virtually guaranteeing a trial where preposterous confessions , asinine occurrences and laughable courtroom procedures are bound to happen .
 commendable is the exceptional performance of billy bob thornton , whose portrayal of the simpleton brother was masterful .
 commendable is the exceptional performance of billy bob thornton , whose portrayal of the simpleton brother was masterful  bill paxton also gives a powerful performance as the greedier younger brother , whilst bridget fonda is convincing as the greediest wife , who indirectly causes the most problems .
 bill paxton also gives a powerful performance as the greedier younger brother , whilst bridget fonda is convincing as the greediest wife , who indirectly causes the most problems .
 studio chose not to allow critics to view this steven seagal film when it first opened  seagal plays jack taggert , an aikido-versed , fighting machine , who is an agent with the epa  but the script puts seagal right smack dab in the middle of all of these scenarios as he tries to discreetly fit in  seagal's idea of a disguise is a long-length $1000 leather jacket  the sometimes allure of watching seagal is watching him outmaneuver enemies that outnumber and outgun him like in under seige  townsfolk who are foolish enough to challenge seagal are quickly subdued  but the epitome of how moralistically mushy this film gets happens when the person responsible for the toxic dumping , kristopherson , meets up with seagal  kristopherson asks seagal how much it will take for him to go away  seagal gallantly replies : " i'll leave when you take the poison from the streams and the earth  this is truly nothing more than a pompous showcase for seagal's righteousness and narcissistic arrogance  seagal has been vanguard in trying to bring a new genre into the filmplace , that of the enviro-thriller ( on deadly ground ) .
 it's beauty and natural goodness is being slowly destroyed by an uncaring mining magnate ( kris kristopherson , who constantly looks like he wants to kill his agent for getting him this role )  but the epitome of how moralistically mushy this film gets happens when the person responsible for the toxic dumping , kristopherson , meets up with seagal  kristopherson asks seagal how much it will take for him to go away .
now , with that in mind , coupled with the knowledge of jodie foster's involvement in the project , i thought " what in the world is foster doing in a sci-fi blockbuster ? ? ? " allie ( foster ) is a radio astronomer a strong point which propelled the movie is the depth of its main characters played by foster and mcconaughey from the very first meeting scene , it is obvious that the two of them was sort of kindred spirits but they were worlds apart in almost all aspects , foster being a person drawn to science and facts and mcconaughey being one who believes in faith , hope and the power of the unseen .
her work has never been off the scrutiny of the us government , which considers it a waste of taxpayer's money and politically unviable , her supervisor ( tom skerritt ) pulls the plug on seti .
her eligibility for the spot failed when she is questioned on her beliefs in the existence of god by the president's spiritual advisor ( mcconaughey ) ; allie , being an atheist , a result of her belief in fact and science , refuses to budge upon questioning a strong point which propelled the movie is the depth of its main characters played by foster and mcconaughey from the very first meeting scene , it is obvious that the two of them was sort of kindred spirits but they were worlds apart in almost all aspects , foster being a person drawn to science and facts and mcconaughey being one who believes in faith , hope and the power of the unseen .
 somerset maugham's story " miss thompson " cast : gloria swanson , raoul walsh , lionel barrymore silent after the discussion of the newly-restored version of frank capra's lost horizon , where several scenes had been restored using stills , i was interested to see sadie thompson , where the last 5 minutes of the film had been destroyed many years ago  the actors : gloria swanson , raoul walsh ( who also directed and wrote the screenplay ) and especially lionel barrymore , as the hypocritical reformer who supposedly wants to save sadie's soul , but really wants to get her between the sheets , is the absolute epitome of sanctimonious scoundrel .
 , 1928 ) director : raoul walsh screenwriter : raoul walsh , from the john colton play " rain " , based on w  somerset maugham's story " miss thompson " cast : gloria swanson , raoul walsh , lionel barrymore silent after the discussion of the newly-restored version of frank capra's lost horizon , where several scenes had been restored using stills , i was interested to see sadie thompson , where the last 5 minutes of the film had been destroyed many years ago  the actors : gloria swanson , raoul walsh ( who also directed and wrote the screenplay ) and especially lionel barrymore , as the hypocritical reformer who supposedly wants to save sadie's soul , but really wants to get her between the sheets , is the absolute epitome of sanctimonious scoundrel .
 somerset maugham's story " miss thompson " cast : gloria swanson , raoul walsh , lionel barrymore silent after the discussion of the newly-restored version of frank capra's lost horizon , where several scenes had been restored using stills , i was interested to see sadie thompson , where the last 5 minutes of the film had been destroyed many years ago  the actors : gloria swanson , raoul walsh ( who also directed and wrote the screenplay ) and especially lionel barrymore , as the hypocritical reformer who supposedly wants to save sadie's soul , but really wants to get her between the sheets , is the absolute epitome of sanctimonious scoundrel .
 sigourney weaver has become comfortable with the role , and she does well with it , but this time the role has been underwritten and left slack .
 the supporting actors are also not given a lot to do : the doctor ( charles dance ) and another , rather religious inmate ( charles s .
near the end of frank capra's holiday classic , its a wonderful life , george bailey ( jimmy stewart ) is feeling down .
 dorian ( wilson ) and angus ( busey ) were getting even for his philandering ways on behalf of their anguished mother ( o'hara )  she is winning in a role that requires her to do absolutely nothing except look apple-cheek cute and gawk at wilson , her real-life boyfriend .
 dorian ( wilson ) and angus ( busey ) were getting even for his philandering ways on behalf of their anguished mother ( o'hara ) .
 the protagonist of the movie is jack ( played by jeff fahey ) , yacht skipper that falls madly in love with christina ford ( played by bo derek )  his partner bo derek , on the other hand , shows that she didn't age enough to cease being the sex goddess , but that is small compensation for her apparent lack of acting talents .
 the protagonist of the movie is jack ( played by jeff fahey ) , yacht skipper that falls madly in love with christina ford ( played by bo derek )  that is especially the case with jeff fahey , whose jack is so stupid that even the character played by fahey in lawnmower man looks like a genius in comparison .
 however , she has relationship with rich and powerful jonathan ashby ( steven bauer ) .
among multitude of erotic thrillers , that had been released in the early 1990s , woman of desire is interesting only because it was directed by robert ginty , star of the b-grade action films of the previous decade  hill ( robert mitchum ) happens to be very good lawyer , so jack might even prove his innocence in the end .
crime lord joe cabot ( veteran actor lawrence tierney ) has assembled five criminals who have never even met each other to pull a diamond store heist .
--scenes of intelligent , amusing dialogue with no relevance to the plot --a story that jumps back and forth in time rather than going in a logical , chronological sequence --graphic yet necessary violence --an engaging crime story --dialogue liberally spiced with swear words and racial/gender slurs --three of the same actors ( harvey keitel , tim roth and steve buscemi ) --a mexican standoff ending , although this one is considerably less optimistic than pfreservoir dogs is an entire hour shorter than pulp fiction because it's only got one story to tell rather than three  white ( keitel ) , mr .
--scenes of intelligent , amusing dialogue with no relevance to the plot --a story that jumps back and forth in time rather than going in a logical , chronological sequence --graphic yet necessary violence --an engaging crime story --dialogue liberally spiced with swear words and racial/gender slurs --three of the same actors ( harvey keitel , tim roth and steve buscemi ) --a mexican standoff ending , although this one is considerably less optimistic than pfreservoir dogs is an entire hour shorter than pulp fiction because it's only got one story to tell rather than three  pink ( buscemi ) , mr .
--scenes of intelligent , amusing dialogue with no relevance to the plot --a story that jumps back and forth in time rather than going in a logical , chronological sequence --graphic yet necessary violence --an engaging crime story --dialogue liberally spiced with swear words and racial/gender slurs --three of the same actors ( harvey keitel , tim roth and steve buscemi ) --a mexican standoff ending , although this one is considerably less optimistic than pfreservoir dogs is an entire hour shorter than pulp fiction because it's only got one story to tell rather than three  orange ( roth ) , mr most of the movie's running time is spent with mr a lot of the time , reservoir dogs seems like your typical gangster heist-gone-wrong movie , but there are a few sequences that are uniquely tarantino  "another scene involves roth's lengthy manufactured story about running into a group of cops and a police dog in a bus station bathroom while carrying a giant bag of marijuana neither of these have much plot relevance but are given ample time to develop , like the captain koons gold watch speech in pulp fiction , only here these sequences are more enjoyable than the rest of the movie .
on the basis of this film alone , i never would have predicted that , in two years , quentin tarantino would become the country's biggest hotshot director .
 oscar's son ( jonathan silverman ) and felix's daughter ( lisa waltz ) are getting married , and former roommates felix ungar ( lemmon ) and oscar madison ( matthau ) meet at the airport and decide to share a car .
 oscar's son ( jonathan silverman ) and felix's daughter ( lisa waltz ) are getting married , and former roommates felix ungar ( lemmon ) and oscar madison ( matthau ) meet at the airport and decide to share a car .
 that might have been an exciting notion if it wasn't for the fact that the " odd couple " of jack lemmon and walter matthau have been reunited in several recent movies : 1993's " grumpy old men , " 1995's " grumpier old men , " and 1997's " out to sea " ( i  the plot is even similar to that of " grumpy old men " in that lemmon and matthau's mismatched characters are brought together by a romance between their children  oscar's son ( jonathan silverman ) and felix's daughter ( lisa waltz ) are getting married , and former roommates felix ungar ( lemmon ) and oscar madison ( matthau ) meet at the airport and decide to share a car  it was the second outing for the lemmon/matthau team ( which debuted in 1966's " the fortune cookie " ) , and they made a couple more worthwhile comedies , " the front page " ( 1974 ) and " buddy buddy " ( 1981 ) , before going their separate ways  the reunion of lemmon and matthau in " grumpy old men " six years ago was delightful , and its sequel seemed appropriate because it tied up some loose ends from the first movie   ( you can add lemmon's " my fellow americans , " i .
 that might have been an exciting notion if it wasn't for the fact that the " odd couple " of jack lemmon and walter matthau have been reunited in several recent movies : 1993's " grumpy old men , " 1995's " grumpier old men , " and 1997's " out to sea " ( i  the plot is even similar to that of " grumpy old men " in that lemmon and matthau's mismatched characters are brought together by a romance between their children  oscar's son ( jonathan silverman ) and felix's daughter ( lisa waltz ) are getting married , and former roommates felix ungar ( lemmon ) and oscar madison ( matthau ) meet at the airport and decide to share a car  it was the second outing for the lemmon/matthau team ( which debuted in 1966's " the fortune cookie " ) , and they made a couple more worthwhile comedies , " the front page " ( 1974 ) and " buddy buddy " ( 1981 ) , before going their separate ways  the reunion of lemmon and matthau in " grumpy old men " six years ago was delightful , and its sequel seemed appropriate because it tied up some loose ends from the first movie .
well , if you're in the mood for some seriously mindless entertainment , ben stiller and his cast of many have assembled one of the more original dumb comedies in some time .
and if you're the type of person who likes celebrity cameos in films , well , don't look any further because dozens of famous faces show up here including vince vaughn , billy zane , winona ryder , christian slater , david duchovny , natalie portman and many , many others .
and if you're the type of person who likes celebrity cameos in films , well , don't look any further because dozens of famous faces show up here including vince vaughn , billy zane , winona ryder , christian slater , david duchovny , natalie portman and many , many others .
and if you're the type of person who likes celebrity cameos in films , well , don't look any further because dozens of famous faces show up here including vince vaughn , billy zane , winona ryder , christian slater , david duchovny , natalie portman and many , many others .
and if you're the type of person who likes celebrity cameos in films , well , don't look any further because dozens of famous faces show up here including vince vaughn , billy zane , winona ryder , christian slater , david duchovny , natalie portman and many , many others but those few missteps were nothing compared to some of the more memorable scenes which definitely did work for me !i almost pissed myself during the " gas station " disaster , absolutely adored the " walk-off " contest ( with david bowie as the judge , no less ) and appreciated many of zoolander's moronic one-liners ( " i was a merman .
the very fast-paced film stars mel gibson as jerry fletcher , a fast-talking , witty , comical taxi driver in new york city gibson's performance is terrific , and his character is similar to that of martin riggs in the lethal weapon films gibson again teams up with richard donner , as he did in the lethal weapon films and maverick , and this time around , the combination works even better secondly , i was surprised at mel gibson's performance gibson's character has an almost uncountable number of one-liners , hilarious situations , and his character is one that the audience tends to side with throughout the film mel gibson isn't the only stand-out in the film .
gibson again teams up with richard donner , as he did in the lethal weapon films and maverick , and this time around , the combination works even better .
julia roberts is very good in her performance as alice sutton , the department of justice employee who can't seem to stay away from jerry fletcher , who continually visits alice in hopes that she will do something about his theories .
 jonas ( patrick stewart ) .
 the lynchpin of the film falls on the redundant and sporadic scenes involving mona ( midler ) .
 mona's son , jeff ( marcus thomas ) is a simpleton , hence you can predict his dialogue before it even plods its way from his mouth .
 chief of police rash ( devito ) likes broadway musicals and loves his daughter .
 elle , the chief's daughter ( campbell ) , is bland personified , a dutiful girl with no higher aspiration than to have a child and be married .
 mona's husband phil ( fichtner ) jeckle and hydes from shirking coward to reptilian letch .
 nice guy is the latest jackie chan film , so you should know what to expect  nice guy lacks the sparkle of jackie's best efforts , and its weaknesses are more glaring than ever  jackie chan plays , who else , jackie  for the rest of the film , somehow he mutates into jackie chan , supercop  here lies another crucial flaw in the story : doesn't anyone realize you can copy a tape ? oh well , no one ever said jackie chan movies had to make sense  as luck would have it , diana runs across jackie , and , wouldn't you know it , jackie accidentally ends up with the tape  this leads to countless chase and/or fight scenes which look like they could have been lifted from rumble in the bronx or nearly any other jackie chan movie  however , that doesn't mean an end to the atrocious dubbing that has afflicted jackie's recent americanized releases  whether this is just a very bad case of looping , an effort to minimize accents , or a simple case of nostalgia , it does achieve the same level of distraction present in all of jackie's dubbed films  nice guy is negligible , merely an excuse to have jackie on the run from various goons  but even though plots have always been second to the action in jackie's films , it seems odd that the filmmakers have stuck us with this tired retread  look , if you have jackie chan playing a chef , why not use that to your advantage ? watching jackie doing his stuff in a kitchen , beating the bad guys with foodstuffs sounds like the perfect setup for innumerable comic stunts  there's really only one no holds barred fight scenes that have become the trademark of jackie's films  it takes place in the arbitrary location of a construction site , apparently for the sole reason that there are lots of nifty things lying around that can be useful ala jackie chan  the action in the film is neither jackie's best nor worst , but you long for some more inspiration in the scenes  but to slo-mo jackie running ? either this is a nod to the six-million dollar man , or a pathetic attempt to disguise the fact that jackie may be slowing down  if you've seen all of jackie's films and are in need of another fix , go ahead and see mr .
 perhaps he was in the same cooking class as steven seagal in under siege ? a tv newswoman , diana ( gabrielle fitzpatrick ) , covertly tapes a drug deal involving kingpin giancarlo ( richard norton ) and a local gang of toughs , the demons .
 perhaps he was in the same cooking class as steven seagal in under siege ? a tv newswoman , diana ( gabrielle fitzpatrick ) , covertly tapes a drug deal involving kingpin giancarlo ( richard norton ) and a local gang of toughs , the demons .
what do you get when you slap together a movie based on a story by the legendary george lucas , directed by virtuoso director steven spielberg , and starring one of the biggest box-office stars in the world , harrison ford ?you get one hot-fudge-rockin' good time , that's what you get ! ! !plot : professor/archeologist indiana jones sets out to find the long-lost mystical ark of the covenant before the nazis get their grubby fingers hands on it watching this movie made me feel like a kid again , dreaming and fantasizing about fighting the bad guys , travelling to different countries , making the impossible , possible !harrison ford is perfect as the every-man with the brains of a scientist and the brawn of an outdoors adventurer , and spielberg manages to achieve the ideal balance of action , fun , adventure and humor as legend has it , actor harrison ford was suffering diarrhea at the time , and asked if the scene could be shortened when indy first falls in the well of souls and is face to face with the cobra , you can see the snake's reflection on the glass dividing it and harrison ford , also some fingerprints and stuff like that .
actor tom selleck was originally cast as indiana jones , but was committed to his hit tv show , " magnum p .
he's given a job at the radio station to his best friend , played by daniel stern , out of sympathy while stern's character works through his divorce after a business trip to las vegas , crystal , stern , and lovitz stay a few extra days to go off in search of the treasure there are memorable moments like when stern is bitten by a snake , but there are fewer jokes to laugh at in the sequel ( surprise , surprise for a sequel , right ? ) .
his loser younger brother ( john lovitz ) comes to mitch's house to bum a money and place to live , all while mitch and his wife try to celebrate his birthday after a business trip to las vegas , crystal , stern , and lovitz stay a few extra days to go off in search of the treasure .
during the celebration , mitch discovers what appears to be a treasure map in curly's ( the cattle drive leader in the original played by jack palance ) old hat on the way , they run into curly's twin brother , duke , played by ( you know who ) jack palance .
the basic plot revolves around billy crystal , who plays mitch robbins , turning forty after a business trip to las vegas , crystal , stern , and lovitz stay a few extra days to go off in search of the treasure .
we have the story of a dying man earl partridge ( jason robards ) wanting to get in touch with his son and make amends .
officer jim kurring ( john c  reilly ) is a patrolman who has a need to feel he is making the world a better place john c  reilly seems to be a standard fixture .
phil parma ( philip seymour hoffman ) is his nurse who is frantic to help partridge achieve his final goal jimmy gator ( philip baker hall ) hosts a popular children's tv quiz show that really exploits and destroys children as we see from the stories of current quiz kid stanley spector ( jeremy blackman ) and former quiz kid donnie smith ( william h particularly notable is philip baker hall who gave a mesmerizing performance from the first scene of hard eight  " and the frogs shall come up both on thee and upon thy people , and upon all thy servants note that the previous verse says " and the river shall bring forth frogs abundantly which shall go up .
phil parma ( philip seymour hoffman ) is his nurse who is frantic to help partridge achieve his final goal jimmy gator ( philip baker hall ) hosts a popular children's tv quiz show that really exploits and destroys children as we see from the stories of current quiz kid stanley spector ( jeremy blackman ) and former quiz kid donnie smith ( william h particularly notable is philip baker hall who gave a mesmerizing performance from the first scene of hard eight .
partridge's young wife linda ( julianne moore ) is getting more and more anxious as partridge dies , but for an unsuspected reason .
 ( huh ? )well , in any event , that is the situation hank ( paxton ) finds himself in paxton gives one of the better performances of his career as the straight and serious leader of the group ( a far cry from chet in wierd science ) .
he and his dim-witted brother jacob ( thorton ) and tubby friend lou ( brent briscoe ) come upon a large bag of cash inside a plane wreck and then there's billy bob thorton , who is proof that the independent film industry is vital to the life blood of hollywood if it can continute to produce people like thorton , hollywood will be ok .
he and his dim-witted brother jacob ( thorton ) and tubby friend lou ( brent briscoe ) come upon a large bag of cash inside a plane wreck .
perhaps bridget fonda is miscast as his advice-giving wife , but she certainly doesn't do anything ruin the picture .
 don't get me wrong , i think that deniro is one of the top ten greatest actors of the century , but he is just out of his league here  it creates an uneven character that never breaks out of the deniro mold ; you always know it's him  the formula of the film seems to be this : billy crystal says no to deniro , deniro forces him , and much wackiness ensues .
 if he had played the character straight , along the lines of leslie nielson in the " naked gun " series , he probably would have been a lot more successful .
 the formula of the film seems to be this : billy crystal says no to deniro , deniro forces him , and much wackiness ensues .
part of that is just being biased as i usually enjoy anything that tommy lee jones appears in .
at the beginning of the movie , he is admiring an award the city has given him for his work , but he is soon confronted by vincent , a patient malcolm failed years earlier ( donnie wahlberg-former new kid-in an impressive cameo ) .
bruce willis plays child psychologist malcolm crowe it's hard enough to find a grown-up in hollywood who can give a subtle , realistic portrayal !although willis gets top billing , cole is really the protagonist of the story , and osment truly brings the complex kid to life if only willis' work were as impressive accustomed to delivering catchphrases rather than dialogue , willis is stiff and awkward as malcolm , his most challenging role to date .
weird things seem to happen around cole-his mother ( olivia williams ) leaves the kitchen for a moment and returns to find every cabinet and drawer open even though cole hasn't moved-and cole seems to know things that a kid his age shouldn't-for example , that there was once a gallows in his school .
 lee emery ) , a gruesome double murder , and the arrival of a morose fbi agent ( dennis quaid ) on the eve of voting for the local lawman's reelection  and through the whole thing there's quaid , playing with the most intense monotony this side of steven sea- gal .
 lee emery ) , a gruesome double murder , and the arrival of a morose fbi agent ( dennis quaid ) on the eve of voting for the local lawman's reelection .
 the second pairs a hitch- hiker ( jared leto ) with a friendly former railroad worker ( danny glover ) .
 the second pairs a hitch- hiker ( jared leto ) with a friendly former railroad worker ( danny glover ) .
 lee emery ) , a gruesome double murder , and the arrival of a morose fbi agent ( dennis quaid ) on the eve of voting for the local lawman's reelection  and through the whole thing there's quaid , playing with the most intense monotony this side of steven sea- gal .
 the stars i'm referring to are the computer generated ones that make up the movie's " outer space " ; the stars that the less impressive actors hurtle thru as they try to find their way home  john robinson ( william hurt ) is the scientist leading a mission program to colonize a foreign planet  hurt , the black hole of excitement , sucks up any energy that might have been left  if hurt were available in tablet form , he would be a prescription strength sleeping pill .
 earth's entire existance is contingent upon a successful mission , but nobody , whether it be john's family or hired battle pilot don west ( matt leblanc ) , seems too enthusiastic about leaving their home planet for several years  if you , like me , were convinced by commercials that her voice was altered for some sort of plot twist where her body would be taken over by aliens , you're wrong ! that's just her normal voice ! in yet another example of a " friend " faltering on the big screen , leblanc is so incredibly dull and yet so obviously trying so hard to be so incredibly charming ( make sense ? ) , it makes you want to shove his ass out the escape pod corridor without an escape pod .
 john's family consists of his wife maureen ( mimi rogers ) , his atypical teenage daughter penny ( lacey chabert ) , his ingenious son will ( jack johnson ) , and his beautiful scientist daughter judy ( heather graham )  rogers-would-be-proud sentiment  but alas , if you thought a character couldn't be much worse , there was rogers as the epitome of generic ( or , mother as she was known ) .
 john's family consists of his wife maureen ( mimi rogers ) , his atypical teenage daughter penny ( lacey chabert ) , his ingenious son will ( jack johnson ) , and his beautiful scientist daughter judy ( heather graham )  it's hard to tell who deserves the most blame - the incredibly bland and corny characters or the horrifically lame script ? chabert is basically the only one to overdo it , sounding like a whiny munchkin on helium .
 john's family consists of his wife maureen ( mimi rogers ) , his atypical teenage daughter penny ( lacey chabert ) , his ingenious son will ( jack johnson ) , and his beautiful scientist daughter judy ( heather graham )  johnson isn't dull , he's just lame as the young know it all who winds up saving everybody's ass all the time .
tom hanks is stunning as capt john miller , set out in france during ww ii to rescue and return home a soldier , private ryan ( matt damon ) who lost three brothers in the war the academy will not forget tom hanks come april 1999 , as another well deserved oscar with be in tom's posession .
tom hanks is stunning as capt john miller , set out in france during ww ii to rescue and return home a soldier , private ryan ( matt damon ) who lost three brothers in the war .
 third , the main character is a mercenary that delivers goods without asking about the contents of his cargo ( treat williams ) .
 at the outset , the movie appears to be about tony danza , who's an illegal distributor of guns , trying to establish a relationship with an unsuspecting woman  danza sets up a double date with her , her sister , and a collegue of his  much confusion and mahem ensues , as the death is covered up and other associates of danza's begin to emerge , all after one thing or another  the only aspect of the movie that actually works is the budding relationship between danza and the dead woman's sister  one thing i will give the movie is that it's a complete departure for tony danza  michael madsen is also good as an associate of danza's who spends half the movie buddying up to him and the other half trying to kill him .
 michael madsen is also good as an associate of danza's who spends half the movie buddying up to him and the other half trying to kill him .
 " the faculty , the latest movie by from dusk till dawn director robert rodriguez , certainly proves this in typical hollywood fashion  only the recognizeable elijah wood ( deep impact ) is at the front ; other than that , the screen veterans are saved for the minor roles of the alien teachers .
this christmas , little ralphie parker ( peter billingsley ) wants nothing more than a red ryder bb gun under the tree on top of that , young billingsley's stupefied reactions to each predicament is absolutely perfect in contrast with the narration in portraying the writer as a persistent but mild-mannered young lad , peter billingsley has struck quite the chord the numerous sequences that stick in one's mind include , of course , the famous department store santa scene - in which billingsley has some problems in telling old saint nick what he wants under the tree .
both melinda dillon ( as mom ) and darren mcgavin ( as ? the old man' ) are perfect in their roles .
both melinda dillon ( as mom ) and darren mcgavin ( as ? the old man' ) are perfect in their roles .
for a good ten years or so , super cool chow yun fat has enjoyed god hood status in the hong kong action scene  now , he has followed in the footsteps of director john woo , ( who launched chow's super stardom in the acclaimed 'a better tomorrow' ) by moving to hollywood  chow plays a hitman who is doing jobs in order to repay a debt  director antoine arqua has clearly not observed chow's excellent acting capabilties and simply requires him to mutter a few lines of broken english and look flash as he stands and shoots  chow's trademark of twin pistol shooting is saved for the finale ( which in fairness is quite good ) and there's not even a toothpick in site  and as for making chow shoot like a cop , well that's damned unforgiveable  to round up , the replacement killers is a pretty darned lame first outing for chow .
 mia sorvino ( a passport forger ) is dragged into the affay and also provides a lame love interest as well as being rather handy with a gun .
 throw in that hunk of a guy keanu reeves and a cast of wacky characters and poof ! we'll have a hit on our hands ! " the replacements is a hokey mistake of a football film , a mishmash collage of one-dimensional characters , rampant stereotypes of cultures and races , cliched emotional statements of purpose , and keanu reeves wishing for the matrix sequel to start principal photography  keanu reeves stars as shane falco , a has-been football college player looking for redemption  this bunch of nobodies try to make something of themselves by taking the team to the season playoffs with unbelievable football plays , gene hackman yelling and asking himself where the hell dennis hopper is , keanu reeves looking for his body double making him look good on the football field , and cheerleaders hired from the local strip club making the girls from coyote ugly look like waitresses from denny's .
 i bet it was some hotshot warner brothers agent with an dark armani suit and manicured fingernails saying , " it would be a very light comedic version of any given sunday , and we could throw in the hoosiers angle with the casting of gene hackman as the tough but determined coach  gene hackman dons a fedora like tom landry and speaks with gusto like a certain coach in hoosiers  this bunch of nobodies try to make something of themselves by taking the team to the season playoffs with unbelievable football plays , gene hackman yelling and asking himself where the hell dennis hopper is , keanu reeves looking for his body double making him look good on the football field , and cheerleaders hired from the local strip club making the girls from coyote ugly look like waitresses from denny's .
 rounding out the cast includes swingers' jon favreau , 7-up pitchman orlando jones , gruff owner jack warden , and cast of wacky and unknown actors who do amazing jobs of portraying perfectly stereotyped characters : the drunken welshman , the overweight sumo wrestler , the black convict , the violent cop , and the dumb , dumb cheerleaders .
 rounding out the cast includes swingers' jon favreau , 7-up pitchman orlando jones , gruff owner jack warden , and cast of wacky and unknown actors who do amazing jobs of portraying perfectly stereotyped characters : the drunken welshman , the overweight sumo wrestler , the black convict , the violent cop , and the dumb , dumb cheerleaders .
 rounding out the cast includes swingers' jon favreau , 7-up pitchman orlando jones , gruff owner jack warden , and cast of wacky and unknown actors who do amazing jobs of portraying perfectly stereotyped characters : the drunken welshman , the overweight sumo wrestler , the black convict , the violent cop , and the dumb , dumb cheerleaders .
but twister had amazing effects and i was hoping so would volcanovolcano starts with tommy lee jones at emo .
the movie is about a teenager ( bacon ) who moves to a small town from the big city , and discovers that dancing has been banned by the local reverend ( lithgow ) kevin bacon oozes charisma in an early role we're rooting for him right from the start , and , unlike most films of this genre , bacon doesn't play him as the " rebel without a clue " sort .
the movie is about a teenager ( bacon ) who moves to a small town from the big city , and discovers that dancing has been banned by the local reverend ( lithgow ) john lithgow , seen here playing a normal guy for a change , is playing a man who would normally be a flat out villian but lithgow plays him as a concerned father who is trying to do what he feels is best for his daughter .
he ends up falling for the preacher's daughter ( singer ) and showing the whole town what the magic of dance can do by the end of the film , we feel a genuine sense of love and understanding between him and the lori singer character .